SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks

KRZYSZTOF GOGOL, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Switzerland
CHRISTIAN KILLER, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Switzerland
MALTE SCHLOSSER, Department of Banking and Finance DBF, University of Zurich UZH, Switzerland
THOMAS BOCEK, Axelra, Switzerland
BURKHARD STILLER, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Switzerland
Financial services that are not only related to crypto-currencies but rely on blockchain for security and integrity are jointly referred to
as Decentralized Fiance (DeFi) and are evolving rapidly. Given their novel applications of DLT and sophistical economical designs, the
distinction between DeFi services and understanding the involved risk are often complex.
    This paper systematically studies the major classes of DeFi protocols, including risk and security. The selection of DeFi categories is
based on a quantitative approach, covering over 80% of total value locked (TVL) in DeFi. Further, a structured methodology is provided
to differentiate between DeFi protocols based on the algorithmic design and blockchain-network architecture. The findings indicate
that every DeFi protocol falls into one of the three classes of DeFi algorithms: liquidity pool, synthetic asset or aggregator protocol.
This work concludes with the risk analysis that is derived from the DeFi protocol, underlying tokens and agents. Certain DeFi assets,
such as crypto-backed stablecoins, liquid staking tokens, and wrapped tokens of bridges, are synthetic assets, similar to derivatives in
traditional finance, and bore similar risk exposure.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Decentralized Finance, DeFi, Blockchain, SoK

ACM Reference Format:
Krzysztof Gogol, Christian Killer, Malte Schlosser, Thomas Bocek, and Burkhard Stiller. 2023. SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) -
Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks. 1, 1 (June 2023), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn


1    INTRODUCTION
In 2008 the Global Financial Crisis put the financial markets in turmoil. In the same year, a pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto,
an anonymous author or a group of authors, proposed a new decentralized payments system and called it - Bitcoin[114].
Unlike the Traditional Financial system (TradFi), Bitcoin does not depend on any centralized and legal entity, such
as a bank acting as a financial intermediary. Sparked by Bitcoin, a myriad of new Blockchain (BC) projects and
cryptocurrencies emerged, and the total market cap of Bitcoin reached over USD 1 trillion in 2021 [23]. With the launch
of the Ethereum BC [65] in 2015, a new generation of BCs emerged. In contrast to Bitcoin and its forks, those BCs
allowed for the execution of turing complete Smart Contacts (SC), executed within the virtual machine hosted by the

Authors’ addresses: Krzysztof Gogol, gogol@ifi.uzh.ch, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Binzmühlestrasse 14, Zürich, Switzerland,
CH—8050; Christian Killer, killer@ifi.uzh.ch, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Binzmühlestrasse 14, Zürich, Switzerland,
CH—8050; Malte Schlosser, malte.schlosser@bf.uzh.ch, Department of Banking and Finance DBF, University of Zurich UZH, Plattenstrasse 32, Zürich,
Switzerland, CH—8032 Zürich,; Thomas Bocek, thomas.bocek@axelra.com, Axelra, Hagenholzstrasse 83, Zürich, Switzerland, CH—8050; Burkhard Stiller,
stiller@ifi.uzh.ch, Department of Informatics IfI, University of Zurich UZH, Binzmühlestrasse 14, Zürich, Switzerland, CH—8050.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


Manuscript submitted to ACM                                                                                                                             1
2                                                                                                      Gogol, Killer, et al.


decentralized BC network. To further advance decentralization, the concept of Decentralized Exchange (DEX) with
Automated Market Maker (AMM) emerged in 2016 [66]. Unlike traditional stock exchanges, the AMM-based DEX
does not rely on a centralized order book. This idea was successfully implemented in 2017 by Uniswap[52], the first
DEX. MakerDAO[108] and Compound[121] followed with the first decentralized stablecoin and decentralized lending
protocol, respectively. In 2016 perpetuals were introduced by BitMEX[53], however, still relying on intermediaries.
Perpetuals resemble traditional futures contracts without a fixed expiration date to enable derivatives amrkets for
illiquid assets. Based on AMMs and collateralized vaults, perpetuals without relying on intermediaries emerged in mid
2020 with MCDEX[37], the Perpetual Protocol[41], or GMX[33].
    DeFi, as enabled by public and permissionless distributed ledger, differs from TradFi in various dimensions. First,
(i) the lack of intermediaries allow parties in DeFi protocols to interact with each other instantly via SCs deployed on
BCs. Consequently, the transaction settlement occurs within seconds, 24/7, contrary to days in TradeFi, and is more
cost-efficient. Second, (ii) the permissionless nature means that any counter-party can interact with the SC, deploy
its own SC, and all transactions and SCs are publicly verifiable. For example, any BC reserves or treasuries of DeFi
protocols can be instantly audited. Third (iii), the immutability of the SCs and the BC imply that code is law and that
nothing can be changed or altered. It should be noted that certain protocols have upgradable SCs, where a certain
amount of people are required to perform updates, or Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) are voting on
specific adaptions. Consequently, DeFi increases efficiency, transparency and accessibility of the financial services[125].
Furthermore, the source code of DeFi protocols is often open-source and the governance is executed via DAOs, allowing
arbitrary stakeholders to participate in the decision-making process[94].




                                               Fig. 1. DeFi Value Proposition


    With general-purpose and programmable BCs (e.g., Ethereum[65], Solana[21], BSC[8]), it became possible to provide
advanced financial services and products without relying on intermediaries for operations, settlement or execution. DeFi
applications, called DeFi protocols, allow swapping, lending, margin trading, and borrowing tokens directly within the
BC, as depicted in figure 1. Tokens, referred to as digital assets, can cryptographically prove ownership of the real-world
asset (e.g., art, real estate, and financial products), be linked to other tokens or exist purely digitally for governance,
utility, social or other purposes. Another popular process is yield farming. It describes the liquidity provisions to DeFi
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                            3


protocols to enable its operations in exchange for participation in the charged fees and thus serves a similar role as
market-making in TradFi. The Total Value Locked (TVL), a value representing the value of digital assets locked in yield
farming or other DeFi protocols as collateral, grew from zero to USD 200 billion in just two years[11] and over five
million BC wallet addresses interacted with DeFi protocols[24].
     The rapid adoption of the DeFi protocols quickly revealed shortcomings of both protocols and underlying BCs.
High transaction costs were the main factor hindering the winder DeFi adoption on the Ethereum BC. Still, Ethereum
comprises today 58.5% of total TVL in DeFi, followed by Tron[47] (11.0%) and BSC[8] (10.6%) [13]. Layer 2 BCs on top
of Ethereum, e.g., Polygon[42], Optimisms[39], zkSynz[25], starknet[22], emerged as scaling solutions that leverage the
security of Ethereum and optimize the transaction costs by taking the calculation off-chain.

1.1     Motivation and Contribution
Numerous SoK and surveys on DeFi and BC exist, however, this work offers novel perspectives. First, related works
mostly provide a high-level overview of DeFi and, second, these works arbitrarily mention selected categories of
DeFi protocols[58, 68, 85, 95, 125, 132, 140]. Another group of research papers focuses on the vertical analysis of
specific DeFi protocols, e.g., decentralized exchanges with automated market making[134], yield farming[76, 133] or
stablecoins[64, 113]. Thus, this work presents the first Systematization of knowledge (SoK) that (i) applies a data-driven
approach for the selection of DeFi protocols’ categories, and (ii) combines the vertical and horizontal research, in order
to present a comprehensive overview of DeFi.
     This work analyses the major, in terms of TVL, classes of DeFi protocols. The initial classification and TVL measures
are derived from DeFi Llama[12] database. Only DeFi categories, which have TVL above five billion US dollars, are
included in the analysis. Those categories represent over 89.09% of TVL in DeFi as of 18.12.2022 and are listed in the
table 1. For the purpose of completeness, we also consider DEX aggregators and algorithmic stablecoins. TVL measure
does not apply to DEX aggregators and algorithmic stablecoins. However, DEX aggregators initiate 25% daily traded
volume via DEXs[12]. When discussing crypto-backed stablecoins, we introduce and classify all other stablecoins -
fiat-backed and algorithmic. Perpetual protocols, with two billion US dollars TVL, are the largest DeFi category that
does not meet the indicated treshold.
                   Table 1. Categories of DeFi protocols[12] with Total Value Locked (TVL) denominated in USD

    DeFi Protocol Category                                                                              Protocols       TVL
    DEX                                                                                                     648        15.86b
    Lending, Interest-rate Protocols                                                                        196        10.83b
    Liquid Staking                                                                                           60         8.63b
    CDP, Crypto-backed Stablecoins                                                                           60         7.92b
    Bridge                                                                                                   36         7.81b
    Yield, yield farming                                                                                    364         5.3b
    Other                                                                                                   656        7.18b



2     FUNDAMENTALS
The general design principles for blockchains and Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) and their implications for
activities in financial services have been widely studied [95]. This section introduces the necessary blockchain definitions
that are later used in the paper.
                                                                                                     Manuscript submitted to ACM
4                                                                                                        Gogol, Killer, et al.

                                              Table 2. Terminology used in this work


    Abbreviation      Term                          Definition
    BC                Blockchain                    Public data storage executing a permissionless consensus protocol in
                                                    a decentralized deployment [? ]
    SC                Smart Contract                Digital protocol implemented in software, executing the terms of a
                                                    contract agreed between two or more parties without the need of an
                                                    intermediary [? ]
    L1                Layer 1                       BC with its own independent network executing a consensus protocol
                                                    security (e.g., BC with its own set of validators or miners)
    L2                Layer 2                       An overlay network that relies on other BC for the security (e.g.,
                                                    immutability)
    DeFi              Decentralized Finance         Financial applications that rely on BC for their security and integrity
                                                    (cf., Tab. 3)
    CeFi              Centralized Finance           Financial applications that are hosted outside of BC, but involve BC in
                                                    their business model (cf., Tab. 3)
    TradFi            Traditional Finance           The traditional financial system, unrelated to BC or DeFi (cf., Tab. 3)
    CEX               Centralized Exchange          Exchange that allows swapping fiat currency to cryptocurrencies and
                                                    tokens
    DEX               Decentralize Exchange         Exchange that operates entirely on the BC and allows to swap cryp-
                                                    tocurrencies and tokens
    AMM               Automated Market Model        Mathematical formula used to determine the exchange rate between
                                                    tokens



2.1      Blockchain
A blockchain (BC) is a computer network that maintains a distributed database. This network only allows appending
new transactions and forbids deleting or updating any transactions. Transactions are grouped into blocks and block
order in the database is maintained, and verifiable, using cryptographic hash functions and digital signatures. BCs
can be classified as permissioned and permissionless. Permissionless BCs are open (public) networks accessible by all.
Permissioned BCs can be accessed only by external parties recognized by the system administrator [99]. For this paper,
we define a BC as a public - trustless and permissionless - distributed ledger. Consequently, DeFi applications are also
trustless - do not depend on any centralized entity - and permissionless - open to use by any BC wallet.
     A network consensus mechanism defines the rules, for what constitutes a legitimate transaction and block. The
dominant consensus mechanisms are proof-of-work (PoW) and proof-of-stake (PoS). The consensus mechanism
economically incentives network participants - miners in PoW and validators in PoS blockchains - to promote network
security. In PoW BCs, miners, to append a new block to the ledger, are required to solve the cryptographic puzzle in a
process that requires electricity[114]. In PoS BCs, validators, to append a new block, must pledge ("stake") a certain
amount of native tokens of the underlying BC. In exchange for appending a new block, validators receive a reward. In
case of malicious behavior, validators are punished, in a process called slashing by a fee from the staked tokens. Staking
is the process of providing BC native tokens to validators to participate in profits from the block rewards. By design,
PoS blockchain requires validators and stakers to freeze their tokens for a period of time that may vary from days to
years. Gas fee is paid to miners and validators for appending the transaction to the BC.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       5


2.2   Layer-1 vs Layer-2
According to blockchain trilemma, the blockchain network can only prioritize two features between three: decen-
tralization, security or scalability[75]. As security is an absolute requirement and decentralization is a promise of
BC, scalability has remained a challenge, resulting in low transaction rates and high transaction processing latencies.
Layer-1 is the blockchain with its own, independent trust assumptions: the network of nodes, and consensus mechanism
[84]. Layer-1 solutions target the improvements of the core elements of blockchain design, e.g., block data, consensus
mechanisms, or sharding the network. Layer-2 solutions aim to scale the BC without modifying the underlying trust
assumptions. Layer-2 protocols are built on top of layer-1 BCs. Roll-ups are the most common scaling solutions for DeFi
protocols deployed to Ethereum[17]. They aim to reduce the load of the main chain by taking the transaction execution
off the chain in batches and bundling them together for on-chain verification. Depending on the verification process,
roll-ups can be divided into two groups: optimistic roll-ups, e.g., Arbitrum[6], Optimism[39], and zero-knowledge (zk)
roll-ups, e.g., zkSync[25], starknet[22]. Table 2 summarizes critical definitions and abbreviations used in the paper.


2.3   DeFi vs CeFi
Decentralized Fiance (DeFi) is a general term that refers to all financial applications that rely on blockchain for their
security and integrity. Centralized Finance (CeFi) describes the financial applications that are hosted outside of BC, but
involve digital assets in their business. An example of such CeFi application is centralized exchange CEX e.g., Binance
[7] or Kraken[16], which allows exchanging the fiat currency (USD, EUR, CHF, etc) into cryptocurrencies. Those
cryptocurrencies purchased at CEX can be further transferred to the crypto wallet on BC or remain in the custody of
CEX. Traditional Finance (TradFi) refers to the traditional finance system that does not involve digital asset-related
activities or products.


                                    Table 3. Comparison of DeFi, CeFi, and TradFi [119],
                                      = Yes, = No, = depends on the specific protocol

                                     BC            BC           Non             DAO
                                   Related     Settlement     Custodial      Governance
                               DeFi
                               CeFi
                               TradFi



  Boundaries between CeFi and DeFi are not always clear and the work [118] provides a structured methodology
for differentiation. If the user is not in control of the tokens (e.g., does not retain custody, cannot transfer the assets
without the financial intermediary), the financial application classifies as CeFi. CeFi applications may operate with BC
settlement or not. In November 2022, FTX, the second largest CEX in the world collapsed, leaving its customers without
access to their cryptocurrencies[14]. If the user is in control of the digital assets, but the financial intermediary can
censor the transaction, such application classifies as CeFi with the BC settlement. Examples include USDT and USDC -
stablecoins that are backed by fiat money. The issuer of USDT destroyed 44M of blacklisted USDT[118]. DeFi protocols
can be further classified by their governance model: centrally governed and DAO. Centrally governed DeFi protocols
are governed from outside of the BC. In the DAO model, decisions are made by holders of governance tokens via voting.
                                                                                                  Manuscript submitted to ACM
6                                                                                                        Gogol, Killer, et al.

                                        Table 4. DeFi stakeholders, based on [58, 95]

        Stakeholder                         Role                                   Incentive
        Service Customers                   Interacts with the DeFi protocol       Profit, credit, liquidity mining
        Liquidity Providers                 Provides capital to DeFi protocols     Protocol fee profit participation,
                                            to ensure sufficient liquidity for     liquidity mining
                                            financial services
        Arbitrageurs                        Eliminate the market inefficien-       Arbitrage Profits
                                            cies between different DeFi pro-
                                            tocols
        Governance Users                    Design, develop and maintain the       Governance token appreciation
                                            DeFi protocol


2.4   DeFi Stakeholders
Blockchain is a decentralized network, in which its stakeholders (nodes, validators) operate in peer-to-peer model,
without any system administrators or centralized entity. DeFi protocols are smart contracts deployed to BC and DeFi
users interact with those smart contracts. Liquidity pool is a smart contract that holds tokens deposited in a DeFi
protocol by liquidity providers (LPs) [93] in order to facilitate financial services (e.g., borrowing, token swapping). LPs
thus fulfill a similar role to that of market makers in TradFi. DeFi stakeholders - service customers of DeFi protocols, LPs,
arbitrageurs, and governance users (e.g., founders, developers, investors) interact with the liquidity pools, operating in
peer-to-pool model[58, 95]. DeFi stakeholders have different incentives and roles in DeFi, and consequently are exposed
to various risks. The table 4 summarizes the DeFi stakeholders and risk analysis follows in the further sections.
    Liquidity mining is a process of interacting with a DeFi protocol to collect its governance tokens or other rewards.
The process is not related to mining in PoW BCs[93]. The prime objective of liquidity mining is to attract new users
and LPs to DeFi protocols.

2.5   DeFi Value Proposition
As summarized in figure 1, DeFi protocols provide various value propositions to users - trading, lending, asset manage-
ment and BC interoperability - and extend the initial objective of BCs: a decentralized payment system and store of
value[114].

2.5.1 Trading. Decentralized Exchanges (DEXs), e.g., UniSwap[52], allow DeFi users to swap between two tokens with
the settlement occurring directly on the blockchain. Compared to Centralized Exchanges (CEXs), DEXs offer higher
diversity of tradeable tokens and higher security of transactions. DEX Aggregators, e.g., 0x[131], are DeFi protocols
that collect exchange rates from various DEXs and the best execution options. The major risks of DEXs for DeFi users
include slippage risk and MEV attacks. Slippage cost refers to the difference between the price quoted by the DEX and
the executed price. The MEV (maximum extractable values) attacks are executed by miners or validators that re-order
transactions for their profits, leaving the DeFi user with higher slippage costs.

2.5.2 Lending. Lending Protocols allow DeFi users to borrow tokens against collateral. Interest rate protocols, such as
Compound[121], and Aave[2], create pools of tokens that can be lent and borrowed, thus they are also referred to as
protocols for loanable funds. Depending on token supply and demand, the protocols automatically adjust interest rates.
Another mechanism for on-chain lending is provided by crypto-backed stablecoin protocols, such as MakerDAO[108],
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       7


and Liquity[35]. Stablecoins are tokens that hold their value pegged to the fiat currency, typically US dollar. In order to
hold the peg to the reference value, crypto-backed stablecoin holds collateral of other crypto tokens to ensure that the
circulating token has a redemption value. Any DeFi user can borrow stablecoins directly from the stablecoin protocols
by proving crypto collateral. In such a case, a collateralized debt position (CDP) is created. The major risk of DeFi
lending is the liquidation risk of the underlying collateral. The liquidation occurs when the collateral value descends
behind the minimum over-collateralization threshold. The dep-peg risk refers to the circumstances when stablecoin
fails to hold the reference value.

2.5.3 Asset Management. The DeFi Protocols in asset management allow DeFi users to generate additional yield on
their tokens. Yield farming is a process of providing liquidity capital to DeFi protocols in exchange for fee participation
rewards[133][134], similarly to market making in traditional finance. Impermanent Loss is a major economic risk
associated with yield farming, caused by the high volatility of the crypto-tokens. Liquid staking refers to DeFi protocols
that accumulate rewards from staking without locking the tokens. The staking process at PoS BCs supports the security
of the underlying BC, but requires locking staked tokens for a defined period to collect the staking reward. De-Peg risks
is the major risk related to liquid staking.

2.5.4 Blockchain Interoperability. Blockchains, by design, are siloed computer networks that do not communicate with
each other. Bridges allow DeFi users to (i) transfer tokens between blockchains without employing any CEX, and (ii)
and to hold exposure to the tokens from other blockchains, e.g., exposure to Bitcoin on the Ethereum chain. To achieve
this objective, bridge protocols create wrapped tokens - tokens with the value pegged to the tokens at other blockchains,
e.g., wrapped Bitcoin[50] on the Ethereum chain. Wrapped tokens are exposed to the de-peg risk.


3     DEFI PROTOCOLS
This section presents the mechanics behind the major DeFi categories: decentralized exchanges (DEXs) and their
aggregators, lending protocols (also referred to as interest-rate protocols or protocols for loanable funds), crypto-backed
stablecoins (also referred to as collateralized debt positions) with other classes of stablecoins, bridges (wrapped tokens)
and liquid staking protocol (liquid staking tokens/derivatives).


3.1    Decentralized Exchanges
Decentralized Exchange (DEX) is a class of DeFi Protocols that facilitates the non-custodial swap of digital assets with
on-chain settlement [132] [104] and is the largest in terms of TVL class of DeFi protocols[12]. Depending on the price
discovery mechanism, DEXs can be further classified into one of two models: central limit order book (CLOB)-based
DEX and liquidity pool based DEX, [95]. While most DEXs support swap of digital assets within one BC, the new class
of DEXs - multi-chain DEX - support swap of digital asset between BCs [132].
    The first implementations of DEXs were based on CLOB, similar to the exchange mechanism in centralized exchanges
(CEX) and traditional finance. CLOB matches buyers with sellers - peer-to-peer model - and the swap price is the last
matched price. This design however proved to be infeasible and expensive at scale on BC. Storing even a small amount
of data on BC is expensive, which, combined with complex order-matching algorithms, leads to excessive fees [95]. The
current CLOB DEX implementations solve this issue by implementing its own Layer1 or Layer2 BC, e.g., dYdX[96],
or moving the storage of CLOB outside of BC (off-chain order book), e.g., 0x Order Book[131]. Off-chain order-book
changes may be classified as belonging to CeFi with on-chain settlement, rather than to DeFi [118].
                                                                                                  Manuscript submitted to ACM
8                                                                                                         Gogol, Killer, et al.


    In contrast to the CLOB-based DEX, liquidity pool-based DEX does not store bids and ask orders at all. Instead, it
employs reserves of two or more tokens, called liquidity pools. Liquidity pools provide counterparty tokens to swap
against - peer-to-pool/peer-to-(smart) contract model - and the swap price is determined algorithmically by the pricing
rules called automated market maker (AMM). Liquidity pool-based DEX, also referred as AMM-based DEX, became
dominant in DeFi for several of reasons: 1) liquidity pools can be created easily for any pairs of digital asset, including
new and minor tokens 2) anyone can provide capital to liquidity pools 3) liquidity pools and AMMs are more efficient
compared to CLOB [132].
    Depositors that seed liquidity pools with capital in return for swap fees, are referred to as liquidity providers (LPs).
The trading fees are distributed to LPs proportionally to the capital provided to the liquidity pool. The process of
providing liquidity to the DEX, or other class of DeFi protocols, in return for profit, is called yield farming and is similar
to market making in traditional finance. Market makers in traditional finance provide both bid and ask orders from
their own book and make a profit from the bid-ask spread.
    Arbitrageurs buy and sell the same asset at various exchanges to profit from the price differences. Even though small
liquidity pools may lead to significant fluctuations in the swap prices, arbitrageurs ensure that the swap price at the
DEX is at parity with the market. The next section presents the most used AMM.


3.1.1 Automated Market Maker (AMM). : An AMM is a mathematical function that algorithmically determines the
swap price between tokens in the liquidity pool via a scoring rule. The most popular scoring rule is the logarithmic
market scoring rule from Robin Hanson [87]. In recent years new AMMs emerged in the field of decentralized finance,
the constant function market makers (CFMM). A CFMM is a trading function 𝜑 : R𝑛+ → R, often called conservation
function or reserve curve, that maps the token reserves 𝑅𝑖 to an constant 𝑘, often referred to as invariant. Therefore, the
conservation function is a relational function between an invariant 𝑘 and token reserves 𝑅𝑖 . In addition, the conservation
function is always concave, nonnegative, and nondecreasing[54] and the spot price is given by the slope of the curve
                                          𝜕𝜑   𝜕𝜑
at the current reserves level 𝑝𝑅𝑖 ,𝑅 𝑗 = 𝜕𝑅𝑖 / 𝜕𝑅 𝑗 . If the liquidity pool contains only two tokens, the two reserves are
typically referred to as 𝑥 and 𝑦. Various AMM formulas are currently in use by DEXs. The most popular AMMs fall into
the category of constant function market making (CFMM), and include the following reserve curves [115, 134]:


3.1.2   Constant Sum Market Maker.
                                                          𝑥 +𝑦 = 𝑘
The constant Sum Market Maker (CSMM) is the simplest form of an AMM. It sums over all reserves and the sum is
defined as the invariant 𝑘, resulting in a swap exchange rate of 1. This means that a small deviation from the price will
lead to arbitrage and one token reserve will be completely drained. Therefore, this AMM is unsuitable as a standalone
solution for DEXs.


3.1.3   Constant Product Market Maker.
                                                          𝑥 ·𝑦 = 𝑘
The Constant Product Market Maker (CPMM) is the most known DeFi AMM and became popular through its use in
Uniswap v2. The function defines the interaction of two token reserves and the invariant by a simple product of the
two reserves. In a swap operation, this always remains the constant 𝑘, so Δ𝑥 of 𝑥 can be swapped for Δ𝑦 of 𝑦, resulting
in (𝑥 + Δ𝑥 )(𝑦 − Δ𝑦 ) = 𝑘 and a spot exchange rate of 𝑝𝑥,𝑦 = 𝑥𝑦 .
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                                9


3.1.4   Constant Mean Market Maker.
                                                            𝑛
                                                            Ö
                                                                  𝑅𝑖𝑤𝑖
                                                            𝑘=1
The Constant Mean Market Maker (CMMM) is the extension of the CPMM. This AMM includes more than 2 token
reserves 𝑅𝑖 and weights them with 𝑤𝑘 and was first introduced by Balancer in 2019[109]. It results in an spot exchange
                 𝑅 ·𝑤
rate of 𝑝𝑖,𝑗 = 𝑅𝑖𝑗 ·𝑤𝑗𝑖 .

3.1.5   Stableswap Invariant.
                                                   𝑛
                                                  ∑︁                          𝑘 𝑛+1
                                       𝐴 · 𝑛𝑛 ·       𝑅𝑖 + 𝑘 = 𝐴 · 𝑘 · 𝑛𝑛 + 𝑛 Î𝑛
                                                  𝑖=1
                                                                           𝑛     𝑖=1 𝑅𝑖
The Stableswap Invariant[80], often also referred to as Curve AMM, mixes the behavior of the CPMM and CSMM and
is mostly meant for Stablecoins. The conservation function includes a leverage/amplification coefficient 𝐴 ∈ R+ which
describes how strongly the function follows a CPMM or CSMM. For 𝐴 → 0 the function behaves like the CPMM, for
𝐴 → ∞ like the CSMM. The spot exchange price is given by
                                                          Î𝑛         𝑛+1
                                           𝑅𝑖 · (𝐴 · 𝑅 𝑗 · 𝑙=1 𝑅𝑙 + 𝑘𝑛𝑛 )
                                    𝑝𝑖,𝑗 =                Î𝑛         𝑛+1
                                           𝑅 𝑗 · (𝐴 · 𝑅𝑖 · 𝑙=1 𝑅𝑙 + 𝑘𝑛𝑛 )
   Figure 2 gives a graphical representation for each of these conservation functions.




Fig. 2. Graphical representation of the AMM conservation                 Fig. 3. Concentrated liquidity and virtual reserves, based on
functions for two tokens with CMMM weights 𝑤𝑥 = 1, 𝑤𝑦 =                  [52]
2 and a stableswap leverage coefficient of 𝐴 = 10




3.1.6 Concentrated Liquidity. Concentrated Liquidity AMM (CLAMM) is an enhancement to AMM that increases
capital efficiency in liquidity pools[4]. It was first proposed by UniSwap v3[52] and allows LPs to define the price
range, for which liquidity is provided. LPs profit from swap fees when the price remains in the defined interval[4].
Consequently, there is a trade-off between larger (less risky, less efficient) intervals and (more risky, efficient) smaller
intervals. Consider a liquidity range interval [𝑝𝑎 , 𝑝𝑏 ] around the current spot price 𝑝𝑐 , then 𝑥𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 and 𝑦𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 denotes the
position real reserves. As soon as the price moves outside the range, a reserve of the liquidity provider is completely
used up. Consequently, CLAMM requires active management and accepting higher financial risk, compared to AMM
                                                                         √
[90]. The liquidity provided is measured by the invariant L, which equals 𝑘 in the CPMM setting. The real reserves of
                                                                                                          Manuscript submitted to ACM
10                                                                                                           Gogol, Killer, et al.


a position are described by a translation of the standard CPMM formula:
                                                       𝐿         √
                                                 (𝑥 + √ )(𝑦 + 𝐿 · 𝑝𝑎 ) = 𝐿 2
                                                       𝑝𝑏
Therefore, the spot exchange rate is identical to the CPMM case (𝑝𝑥,𝑦 = 𝑥𝑦 ). Figure 3 shows the real and virtual reserves
and the shift in the curve.

3.1.7 Risks. The major risks for the participants of AMM-based DEX include 1) slippage cost for traders, 2) impermanent
loss for LPs 2) and transaction-ordering attacks. Those risks come additionally to the explicit costs of DEX - swap fees
and gas fees. Transaction reordering, or MEV-attack, is further discussed in this work, as it poses a risk for many classes
of DeFi protocol.
     Slippage is the difference between the spot price, presented by the DEX, and the actually realized swap price. The
difference is caused by AMM and the reserve curves. The realized price diverges from the spot price for larger swapped
amounts and the divergence is further amplified by smaller liquidity pools. Swap transactions at AMM DEX are set
with the slippage tolerance. Slippage tolerance restricts losses from the MEV attacks.
     Impermanent loss is the difference between holding tokens in the wallet and allocating them to the liquidity pool.
Every swap transaction alters the liquidity pool’s composition, increasing the value-losing token’s reserve. Impermanent
loss can be eliminated by providing liquidity for stablecoin pairs [106] or mitigated by including stablecoin in the token
pair [91]. The impact of impermanent loss has been widely studied across various AMMs[98, 128].


3.2    DEX Aggregators
The rise of DEXs on the same blockchain provides more competitive options for DeFi users, but also leads to fragmented
liquidity among various AMM pools and requires arbitrageurs for price synchronization. DEX arbitrage and trade
routing can be done efficiently on-chain within smart contracts[138]. DEX aggregators provide the optimal routing of
trade orders across multiple DEXs [55]. Around 21.5% of DEX volume is initiated by aggregators[30].


3.3    Interest-rate protocols
Interest rate protocols, also referred to as lending protocols, facilitate borrowing and lending of digital assets [74, 102, 122].
Lenders - liquidity providers (LPs), provide capital to the protocol’s pool - lending pool, from which it is distributed to
borrowers. The interest rate mechanism seeks for equilibrium between the demand and supply of the capital [86]. DeFi
lending protocols are thus not decentralized peer-to-peer lending strategies with direct relations between borrowers and
lenders. Instead, they operates in a peer-to-pool model that avoids individual matching. Thus, the LP has a diversified
risk across all borrowers of this pool and a utilization rate 𝑈𝑡 can be calculated at time 𝑡. The utilization rate is the ratio
of the toal amount borrowed at time 𝑡 to the liquidity at time 𝑡, so 𝑈𝑡 := 𝐵𝐿𝑡𝑡 [2]. Liquidity is provided to the lending pool
managed by the smart contract of the protocol. Thus, the DeFi lending protocols are also referred to as protocols for
loanable funds (PFLs)[86]. Unlike in traditional banking, DeFi participants are anonymous, preventing assessing the
risk of borrowers [57]. To mitigate the default risk, DeFi interest-rate protocols are over-collateralized: a borrower is
required to post collateral covering the value of the debt and the value of the posted collateral must exceed the value of
the debt. If the value of the locked collateral falls below the liquidation threshold, the collateral can be purchased for a
discounted value and the debt position is closed [117]. DeFi loans typically have unlimited maturities and the interest
rate is variable, so it fluctuate from the opening of the loan position and is recalculated constantly. Interest is accrued
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                        11


per second and paid per block[86]. Based on the interest rate model, the lending protocol can be classified into three
major classes: linear, non-linear and kinked rates.

3.3.1 Linear rates. In a linear model, interest is a linear function of the utilization rate. For the borrower, the variable
interest rate 𝑖𝑏,𝑡 results from:
                                                        𝑖𝑏,𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽 · 𝑈𝑡 ,
where 𝛼 is a constant and 𝛽 describes how the interest rate behaves for changes in the utility rate. The lender receives a
lower saving interest rate 𝑖𝑠,𝑡 = 𝑖𝑏,𝑡 · 𝑈𝑡 which also depends on 𝑈𝑡 [86] For example, the first version of Compound
used this model, but it has since been replaced by a kinked rate model [121].

3.3.2 Non-linear rates. In a non-linear model interest rates increase with an increasing rate as the utilization grows.
The interest rate structure was used in the old dYdX layer 1 and DDEX[? ], where the borrowing interest rate is given by

                                             𝑖𝑏,𝑡 = (𝛼 · 𝑈𝑡 ) + (𝛽 · 𝑈𝑡𝑛 ) + (𝛾 · 𝑈𝑡𝑚 ),

with 𝑛, 𝑚 ∈ R The saving interest rate 𝑖𝑠,𝑡 = (1 − 𝜆) · 𝑖𝑏,𝑡 · 𝑈𝑡 includes a reserve factor 𝜆, which puts aside a fraction of
the earned interest rate for more illiquid periods [86].

3.3.3 Kinked rates. In the kinked model, interest rates increase more sharply above a certain (optimal) utilization rate
𝑈𝑜𝑝𝑡 , i.e. there is a kink in the interest rate slope. This is used in the current version of AAVE [2] and Compound [121].
The borrower rate can be characterized by
                                             
                                             𝛼 + 𝛽𝑈𝑡
                                             
                                                                              , if 𝑈 ≤ 𝑈𝑜𝑝𝑡
                                    𝑖𝑏,𝑡 =                                                     ,
                                             𝛼 + 𝛽𝑈𝑜𝑝𝑡 + 𝛾 (𝑈 − 𝑈𝑜𝑝𝑡 )
                                                                              , if 𝑈 > 𝑈𝑜𝑝𝑡
                                             
where 𝛽 describes the interest rate slope up to the optimal utilization rate and 𝛾 >> 𝛽 the slope for a higher utilization.

3.3.4 Total value locked. (TVL) for the interest-rate protocols represents the value of tokens hold by the protocols,
which is the difference between the supplied and borrowed funds, and the value of the collateral. The major interest-rate
protocols, Aave[2] and Compound[121] with USD 3.37bn and USD 1.64b TVL respectively[11], are examples of DeFi
interest-rate protocol with kinked rates. The exchange dYdX[96] implemented non-linear rates to offer loans to its
users.

3.3.5 Liquidation Risk. In case the value of the collateral drops below the liquidation threshold, the borrower automati-
cally defaults on its debts, and the collateral is sold off with the discount, in the process referred to as liquidation [117].
Zero liquidation loans (ZLLs) are the novel approach to mitigate the DeFi liquidation risk by defining the loan tenor
(duration) [124]. The ZLLs protocols such as [49, 116, 123] offer the borrower an option (but not obligation) to reclaim
the collateral upon the repayment of the debt and the fees. If a borrower does not repay the debt before the ZLL expires,
LPs gain the right to liquidate the collateral.

3.3.6 Flash loans. Flash loans are a special class of DeFi loans that allow to borrow without a collateral during a single
transaction. The debt is protected by the atomicitiy enforced by smart contracts and blockchain: if the loan is not
repaid with the interest withing the block, the whole transaction with flash loan is reversed[2]. Flash loans increase the
efficiency of DeFi lending by allowing to purchase any digital assets that can be used as a collateral, including NTF [60],
as presented in the algorithm 1. The platforms [28, 38] accept certain NFTs as a collateral.
                                                                                                    Manuscript submitted to ACM
12                                                                                                     Gogol, Killer, et al.

Algorithm 1 Mortgaging NFT[60]
 1: Flash loan 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 to an address holding 𝑦𝑖 of token 𝑖
 2: Purchase the NFT for 𝑥𝑖 + 𝑦𝑖 of token 𝑖
 3: Deposit the NFT as collateral, with borrowing power of 𝑧𝑖 > 𝑥𝑖
 4: Borrow 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 to repay the flash loan



3.4   Yield Farming
Yield farming is the process of earning income by providing tokens to DeFi protocols for market-making purposes[77]
while token providers are referred to as "yield farmers". The yield farming protocols automate the yield farming process
and can be perceived as algorithmic asset managers that execute the pre-programmed strategy [135]. Technically, yield
farming protocols are aggregators that automatically deploy tokens to other DeFi protocols [133] and are consequently
also referred to as "yield aggregators". The income from yield farming activities might be amplified by the participation
rewards from DeFi protocols, to which tokens are provided. Such participation rewards are typically offered as
governance tokens. Yield farming protocols may charge management and performance fees.

3.4.1 Simple lending. In this strategy, the tokens are provided to the interest rate protocols (e.g., Compound, Aave),
which lend them to the borrower. The token provider (supplier) accrues the supply interest. Given the over-collateralization
required by the interest rate protocols from the borrowers, the strategy is low-risk and losses occur only under extreme
market conditions. Based on the source of yield, the protocol strategies can be divided into the three groups[77]: (i)
simple lending, (ii) leverage borrow, (iii) liquidity provision.

Algorithm 2 Simple Lending Yield Farming Strategy[77]
 1: Deposit token 𝑖 in a lending protocol
 2: Accrue interest of token 𝑖 and collect potential other rewards, e.g. native tokens 𝑧 over time
 3: Withdraw deposits with accrued supply interest and other rewards




3.4.2 Leverage borrow. This strategy aims to maximize the yield from lending by leveraging spirals: tokens deposited
in the interest rates protocols are used as collateral to borrow new tokens. The new tokens are deposited in the interest
rate protocol and used again as collateral to borrow. The process is repeated multiple times. A high degree of leverage
can amplify both profits and losses.

Algorithm 3 Leverage Borrow Yield Farming Strategy[77]
 1: Deposit token 𝑖 in a lending protocol
 2: Borrow token 𝑗 with the deposits as collateral
 3: Deposit borrowed token 𝑗 as collateral
 4: Repeat steps 2–3 multiple times
 5: Accrue interest and collect potential other rewards, e.g. native tokens 𝑧 over time.
 6: Swap the native tokens into the assets borrowed
 7: Repay loans with accrued borrow interest
 8: Withdraw deposits with accrued supply interest and other rewards




3.4.3 Liquidity provision. With this strategy, tokens are provided to liquidity pools (LPs) of AMM DEXs to earn income
in terms of transaction fees charged by DEXs.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       13

Algorithm 4 Liquidity Provisions Yield Farming Strategy[77]
 1: Provide token 𝑖, 𝑗 as liquidity in an AMM pool
 2: Collect transaction fees in token 𝑖, 𝑗 and potential other rewards, e.g. native tokens over time
 3: Withdraw liquidity, accrued fee participation and other rewards




3.5   Stablecoins
Stablecoins are tokens, which value is pegged to a fiat currency, typically 1 USD. They provide a way for DeFi users to
mitigate the volatility of other digital assets, without the need to transfer liquidity outside the blockchain[113]. Holders
of stablecoins are exposed to the de-peg risk - the risk that the stablecoin will not hold the peg to the target value.
Stablecoin protocols employ various mechanisms to hold the peg and depending on the collateral type, they can be
classified into three categories: (i) fiat-backed, (ii) crypto-backed, and (iii) algorithmic stablecoins[64]. The collateral
ensures that the circulating token has redemption value.

3.5.1 Fiat-backed stablecoins. Fiat-backed stablecoins utilize collateral of a fiat currency or commodity outside the
blockchain, thus, they are also referred to as off-chain collateralized stablecoins. Given the collateral held outside of the
blockchain and regulatory restrictions, fiat-backed stablecoins are not considered to be part of DeFi, but CeFi[118].

3.5.2 Crypto-backed stablecoins. Crypto-backed stablecoins maintain the collateral of other crypto tokens on the
blockchain. They are also referred to as on-chain collateralized or over-collateralized stablecoins. Over-collateralization
implies that the total value of the collateral is higher than the total value of the circulating stablecoin supply and is
applied to protect the peg against the volatility of crypto tokens and related sudden price changes of the collateral. Any
DeFi user can mint the new stablecoins, by providing sufficiently over-collateralized collateral. The process can also be
seen as borrowing stablecoins with crypto tokens locked as collateral.
  The borrowing process from the stablecoin protocol is initiated by depositing crypto tokens as collateral. The
collateralized debt position (CDP) is created. In exchange for the deposit, the depositor receives stablecoins, which are
minted by the stablecoin protocol. Once the borrower returns the stablecoins, the CDP is closed: the tokens used as
collateral are returned to the borrower and the stablecoin protocol burns returned stablecoins.

3.5.3 Algorithmic stablecoins. Algorithmic stablecoins maintain their price peg by managing (shrinking or expanding)
the supply of the token. As they do not employ any collateral, algorithmic stablecoins are also referred to as non-
collateralized stablecoins. There are two main types of algorithmic stablecoins: seigniorage and rebasing [112]. The
rebasing coins, such as Ampleforth[27], adjust the balance of coins in the users account, allowing the coin place to
fluctuate. Consequently, some literature does not consider the rebasing coins to be stablecoins. Seigniorage stablecoin
protocols, such as Terra[46], make arbitrary decisions on the minting and burning of the coins in the supply in order to
maintain the peg.

3.5.4 Risks. De-peg risk - the major risk related to the stablecoin - references to the circumstances, in which the
stablecoin loses the peg to the target value. The stablecoin trilemma indicates that any stablecoin design poses limitations
related to one of the following risks: (i) hazards of the operating entity, (ii) exposure to the external market risk, or
(iii) limited coin supply [97]. The major risk of DeFi lending, including borrowing from the stablecoin protocol, is
the liquidation risk - the risk of liquidating the CDP with the locked collateral. The liquidation occurs when the
collateral value descends below the minimum over-collateralization threshold. Borrowers are required to monitor the
                                                                                                   Manuscript submitted to ACM
14                                                                                                      Gogol, Killer, et al.


over-collateralization level of their CDP to avoid liquidations. The automatic detection of the CDP that needs to be
liquidated and initiating the liquidations are not trivial on the blockchain. Smart contacts, by their design, need to be
triggered externally and do not support automation.

3.5.5 CBDC. Stablecoins are typically discussed in relation to the topic of Central Bank Digital Currencies (CBDC), as
a potential implementation of CBDCs. CBDC is a form of digital cash issued by the central bank. CBDC may be but
does not have to be related to the BC or DLT, as it is the issuer - the central bank - of digital cash that is a defining
factor of CBDC. CBDCs are further classified as wholesales or retail[70]. The potential CBDC implementation may be
decentralized or centralized, and may not relay on DLT[70].

3.6   Liquid Staking
Synthetic assets in DeFi are analogous to derivatives in traditional finance (TradFi) [120]. In TradFi, derivatives allow
traders to profit from price movements of stocks and bonds they do not own[82]. Synthetic assets are cryptocurrency
tokens that track the price fluctuations of the target asset[59, 120]. Liquid staking is a synthetic asset that tracks the
value of the tokens staked in the proof-of-stake blockchains [126]. Liquid staking token is also referred to as liquid
staking derivative (LSD) and the protocol minting it - liquid staking protocol (LSP). Staking is the process of locking
tokens in validators for future profit [126]. Validators, network participants in PoS blockchain, put those tokens at stake
when appending new transactions to the blockchain. For each correctly appended transaction, the validator receives a
reward, which is redistributed between token providers (stakers). The dishonest behavior is punished by a reduction
in the staked tokens (slashing). By design, the staked tokens are locked for a specific period, making it impossible to
use them in other applications, reducing the token liquidity. By tracking the value of the staked assets, liquid staking
tokens allow participating in the staking benefits. Unlike the staked tokens, liquid staking tokens are not locked but are
freely traded and used in other DeFi applications. There are three standard LSD models [26, 126]: (i) rebasing tokens,
(ii) reward-bearing tokens, and (iii) dual-token model.

3.6.1 Rebase Tokens. In this model, the LSP tokens keep the 1:1 peg to the staked tokens and inflate the supply to
reflect the yield earned from staking. The most popular rebase LSD is stETH, minted by Lido Protocol[3]. Lido every
day increases the balance of all stETH holders to reflect the additional ETH earned as staking rewards. The advantage
of rebasing LSP is its simple functionality. The disadvantage is lack of the compatibility with other DeFi protocols, e.g.,
DEXs or interest rate protocols.

3.6.2 Reward-bearing Token. In this model, the token does not maintain 1:1 peg to the staked native token, but increases
its value to reflect the staking yields. Consequently, the reward-bearing token grows in value, related to the underlying
native token. Reward-bearing tokens provide better compatibility with DeFi protocols. Most of LSPs follow this design:
RocketPool[43], Marinade [36], CoinBase Wrapped Staking [9].

3.6.3 Dual Token. In the dual token model the asset token is split from the staking revenue it yields. For example,
StakeWise [45] operates in the two token model: sETH2 - with 1:1 peg to ETH - and rETH2 - that reflects the earned
staking rewards. The disadvantage of this model is the fragmented liquidity between two tokens.

3.6.4 Other Classifications. LSP also varies in the validator selection process: (i) whitelisting reputable validators, (ii)
credentials-based, (iii) collateral. In the whitelisting model, LSP adds only trusted validators to the pool of validators,
e.g., Lido[3]. In the credential based-model, the pool of validators is permissionless upon fulling the minimum criteria.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                          15

                                       Table 5. Overview of selected liquid staking tokens

              Tokens                    Protocol                 Blockchain                  Model
              stETH                     Lido                     Ethereum                    rebasing
              wstETH                    Lido                     Ethereum                    reward-bearing
              mSol                      Marinade                 Solana                      reward-bearing
              rETH                      Rocket Pool              Ethereum                    reward-bearing
              sETH2, rETH2              StakeWise                Ethereum                    2 tokens


In the last model, LSP requires validators to post the collateral to guarantee its performance, e.g., Rocket Pool[43]. The
collateral model hampers the growth of the validator pools by increasing the minimum threshold for staking.

3.7   Bridges
DeFi ecosystem has evolved into a multi-chain ecosystem, but each BC is an independent and closed network by design.
Miners and validators write transactions to the BC according to its consensus mechanism. Fragmentation of DeFi
protocol and liquidity across various chains hinders DeFi growth and locks DeFi users to a single BC. Blockchain
interoperability includes the transfer of digital assets, data, and smart contract instructions between BCs, which would
allow DeFi users to utilize digital assets stored in one BC in DeFi protocols on another BC (cross-chain collateral) and
execute low-cost and fast transaction of digital assets stored on less scalable BC (efficiency and scalability). For the DeFi
protocols, blockchain interoperability would allow for more efficient utilization of liquidity, locked across various BCs
[5]. While Polkadot[19] and Cosmos[10] provide frameworks to develop interoperable BCs, e.g., by sharding, they do
not facilitate cross-chain communication with networks outside of their BC-framework[136]. Centralized exchanges
(CEX) can be used to transfer digital assets across blockchains. However, given their centralized nature, they do not
deliver on BC and DeFi promises of decentralization, permissionless and trustless.
   Bridges enable the transfer of tokens between BCs [67, 88, 89, 100, 101, 111, 127, 130, 137], e.g., Bitcoin and Ethereum,
or between layers of the same BC, e.g., Ethereum and its roll-ups. Based on the underlying architecture, bridges can be
classified as (i) wrapped tokens, (ii) liquidity networks and (iii) hybrid solutions[136].

3.7.1 Wrapped Tokens. Wrapped tokens can be further classified as (i) External Validators and Federations (ii) Light
Clients and Relayers [61].

3.7.2 Liquidity Networks. Most DEX supports the exchange of digital assets only within the same BC. What is more
Atomic cross-chain swaps (ACCS) proved to be slow, inefficient, and costly[136].

3.7.3 Other Classifications. The full overview and classification of existing solutions present [18]. Another classification
of bridges: (i) trusted (ii) Binded (iii) Insured (iv) Trust-less [61].

3.8   Perpetuals
Perpetual contracts or swaps in DeFi are derivatives that allows to speculate on the price of an underlying asset, such
as cryptocurrencies, without actually owning the asset. Perpetual contracts resemble traditional futures or options,
however, they do not have a fixed expiration date. This allows to hold their positions indefinitely, as long as the
required collateral limits can be maintained. They were first introduced by the centralized exchange BitMEX in 2016
[53], requiring counter-parties and thus a matching mechanism (similar to CLOB).
                                                                                                      Manuscript submitted to ACM
16                                                                                                         Gogol, Killer, et al.


     While automatic liquidation of collateral is an essential mechanism for any perpetual, another fundamental DeFi
mechanism is necessary to remove the need for counter-parties: virtual AMMs (vAMM). A vAMM can use the same
mathematical principles as an AMM for price determination, which is required for automatic liquidation of collateral
once the price hits a certain limit, e.g., if the price shifts to your disadvantage, you may require to provide more collateral.
In case your collateral limit is reached (also depends on your leverage factor), your collateral will be automatically
liquidated.


4     DEFI PROTOCOL TAXONOMY
DeFi protocols provide various financial services and can be classified based on the value proposition to users: trading,
lending, asset management, and BC interoperability, as depicted in table 1. This section proposes novel classification
frameworks. First, we separate the token classification from the taxonomy of DeFi protocols. Next, we classify DeFi
protocols in two dimensions - algorithm and network (blockchain) architecture. Taxonomy of DeFi algorithms is based
on the technical and economical design of DeFi protocols. The DeFi algorithm determines how financial services are
performed on the BC and to which risks DeFi agents are exposed. Taxonomy of DeFi network architecture, refers to
the number of BCs, on which the protocol operates and the coordination of its work across those BCs. The network
architecture implies the infrastructure risks. The classifications within those two domains, as well as token taxonomy,
are straightforward, as the values assigned to each dimension can be traced from the DeFi protocols’ implementations
and whitepapers that are publicly available.


4.1    Token Taxonomy
There exist multiple extensive token classification frameworks e.g., [56, 58, 83]. Based on the work of [95] and [120] we
select the two token classification domains: "technology" and "underlying value". Token technology comprises two
dimensions: BC native tokens (e.g., Bitcoin, Ethereum, Solana) and smart-contract-enabled tokens. The "underlying
value" dimension comprises three dimensions: asset-backed, network value, and share-like[83]. Asset-backed tokens
comprise tokens linked to other assets (e.g., tokens confirming participation in liquidity pools), derivative tokens with
other tokens as underlying (e.g., stablecoins, liquid staking tokens), and real-world assets - tokenized assets from the
real world. The proposed taxonomy, which combines and simplifies, other classification frameworks [83], emphasizes
the risk of the token holder. This token classification can help to ensure a consistent view of the different token types
and the underlying counterparty risk.

      • Native tokens: Layer 1 BC’s native tokens, e.g., Bitcoin, and Ethereum.
      • Smart contract enabled tokens: Tokens that are created within BC by smart contracts can be further divided
        into more granular dimensions:
        – Network Value: the underlying value is represented by the level of trust, e.g., DAO governance tokens or
           other utility tokens for fee payments within the smart contract applications. Network-driven demand for the
           token may lead to an increase in value in case of limited supply.
        – Asset-backed
           ∗ On-chain Asset: tokens tied to other on-chain tokens, e.g., tokens representing participation in the liquidity
              pool in yield farming at AMM DEX,
           ∗ Synthetic Assets: the underlying assets comprise another on-chain asset, e.g., crypto-backed stablecoin,
              liquid staking token, or wrapped Bitcoin (for bridged tokens),
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                  17




                                                 Fig. 4. Taxonomy of Tokens




         ∗ Real-World Assets: the underlying value is tied to the tokenized real-world assets, e.g., fiat money for
           fiat-backed stablecoins.
      – Share-like Tokens: the underlying value is generated by the work of the token holder or 3rd party issuers
         e.g., NFT representing art ownership.


4.2   Taxonomy of DeFi Algorithms
In the design domain, the DeFi protocol can be classified into three dimensions: (i) liquidity pools (ii) aggregators
(iii) synthetic tokens, as presented in figure 6. The DeFi protocols are developed on the infrastructure layer of their
underlying blockchains. The infrastructure layer includes native tokens or staking for proof-of-stake blockchains.

4.2.1 Liquidity Pools. Liquidity pool-based DeFi protocols match the demand and supply using token pools operated by
smart contracts. The major DeFi liquidity pool-based protocols include decentralized exchanges (DEX) and interest-rate
protocols. DEXs manage the supply and demand to swap tokens and, depending on the design, can be further classified
as CLOB or AMM. There are various implementations of AMM, with concentrated liquidity being the latest improvement
that increases the capital efficiency at AMM DEX. The interest-rate protocol manages the supply and demand for
borrowing and lending and adjusts interest rates automatically. DeFi liquidity pools protocols and stablecoins are
referred to as DeFi primitives [77].

4.2.2 Aggregators. The major aggregator protocols facilitate the operations of DEXs and include DEX aggregators and
yield farming protocols. DEX aggregators allow DEX service customers - traders - to find the best execution rate, and
sometimes offer protections again MEV attacks, by splitting the transaction into smaller ones. Yield farming protocols
simplify and increase liquidity efficiency at AMM DEXs.
                                                                                              Manuscript submitted to ACM
18                                                                                                    Gogol, Killer, et al.




                                           Fig. 5. Taxonomy of DeFi Algorithms




4.2.3 Synthetic Tokens. Synthetic tokens are similar to derivatives in traditional finance. They employ smart contracts
to keep the peg to the target value, which might be fiat currency - stablecoins, tokens at other blockchains - wrapped
tokens of bridges, and staked tokens - liquid staking. The inherent risk of all synthetic tokens is the re-peg risk.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       19


4.3    Taxonomy of DeFi Network Architecture
This dimension indicated whether DeFi protocols operate on a single chain or across multiple chains. Protocols operating
on multiple networks are in the early stage but they are expected to play a substantial role in DeFi in future[83].

4.3.1 Single Chain. Single-chain protocols are deployed and operate within one BC. Most of DeFi protocols operate on
single chain[11].

4.3.2 Cross Chain. Cross-chain protocols that operate on multiple BCs and allow the value to cross between BCs.
Those protocol utilize blockchain interoperability technologies so that the value stored on one BC is transformed into
value at other BC[105]. The cross-chain protocols include bridges.

4.3.3 Multi Chain. Multi chain protocols are deployed to multiple blockchain, at which they operate independently.
Contrary to cross-chain protocols, they do not utilize value cross BC, e.g., cross-chain collateral. Example of DeFi
protocols deployed to multiple chains include Aave[2], Uniswap[52].

4.3.4 App Chain. App-chain (or Solo-chain) is DeFi protocol that developed sovereign BC to optimise its services for
the specific use cases. Depending on the security model of the sovereign BC, the app-chain can be classified at L1,
L2 or L3. Cosmos[10] provides SDK for the development of L1 appchain. Polkadot[19] simplifies the development of
L2 appchains, called parachains by Polkadot. Starknet[22] and zkSync[25] are zero-knowlege rollups (L2) on top of
Ethereum and offer possibilities to built furhter L3.




                                       Fig. 6. Taxonomy of DeFi Network Architecture



5     DEFI RISK AND ATTACK CLASSIFICATION
With the rapid increase of TVL, attacks on DeFi protocols have gradually emerged [71, 103, 139]. In DeFi exploits,
attackers gain profits from the vulnerability in the technical or economic security of the DeFi protocols [132]. Table 6
summarizes DeFi risks and their impact on DeFi stakeholders - service customers, liquidity providers (LPs), arbitrageurs,
or governance users. This section discusses these risks and attacks in detail. As yield farming protocols are aggregators
that provide liquidity to other DeFi protocols, this category possesses risks of LPs.
    The blockchain trilemma states that every BC can prioritize only two from three factors: decentralization, security,
and scalability[75]. The limited scalability of the BC results in network congestion and high transaction fees. A lack of
decentralization allows for transaction censorship. The security attacks target vulnerabilities in the technical (e.g., smart
contract, transaction re-ordering) or economical design (e.g., oracle price manipulation) of DeFi protocols and BCs.
                                                                                                   Manuscript submitted to ACM
20                                                                                                    Gogol, Killer, et al.

Table 6. DeFi Security Risk Overview.
C: Service Customers, LP: Liquidity Provider, A: Arbitrageur, G: Governance User
  = Not Vulnerable, = Vulnerable, = Depends


                               CLOB             AMM              Interenst-rate    Stablecoins   Bridges    Liquid
                               DEX              DEX              Protocols                                  Staking
                                                   LP
                               C    LP    A     C           A    C     LP    A     C   A         C    A     C    A      G
                                                   YF
 DeFi Risks
 Rug Pull Attack
 Slippage
 Impermanent Loss
 Liquidation
 De-peg
 Infrastructure Attack
 MEV Attack
 Blockchain Attack
 Middle Layer Attack
 Smart Contract Attack
 Application Attack
 Oracle-Attack



      • Limited Scalability Scalability is the central issue for BC networks[84]. The limited scalability leads to network
        congestion and spikes in transaction costs. During the network congestion, transactions of arbitrageurs, and
        other DeFi stakeholders, may not be executed, leading to market inefficiency and information delays[95]. Layer-2
        solutions aim to scale the underlying main chain at the cost of various security assumptions[84].
      • Centralization Risk Centralization might affect both the BCs and the DeFi protocols. DeFi Protocols increasingly
        rely on governance tokens to decentralize the decision-making process[94]. Nonetheless, the distribution of
        governance tokens may remain concentrated within the small groups of colluding stakeholders, as the distribution
        of voting powers is a gradual process[129].
      • Security Threats DeFi Protocols operate on BC as smart contracts and are prone to security attacks on various
        layers: BC infrastructure, smart contract, and application attacks[134].

5.1    Infrastructure-layer Attacks
The infrastructure-layer attacks include vulnerabilities in the BC design. They might directly target the BC, its nodes,
and consensus mechanisms on which DeFi protocols operate (BC Attack) or exploit design faults in processing the
transaction (MEV Attack).

5.1.1 Blockchain Attacks. The 51% attack allows tampering with the ledger data by controlling over half of the network
hash rate. Other examples include block timestamp manipulation. DeFi service customers and arbitrageurs are partially
affected during the BC attacks, as they are only restricted from using the DeFi Protocols. LPs lose all tokens locked
on the victim BC. Similarly, issuers of stablecoins and liquids staking tokens lose the collateral. The governance users
are fully affected, as their DeFi protocol is based on the victim BC. The BC attacks might be mitigated by using DeFi
protocols only from the established BCs with vast networks of nodes and staked assets.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       21


5.1.2 Collapse of Terra Blockchain. The Terra blockchain belonged to the ten largest blockchains with a market
capitalization of over $30bn. Its collapse was caused by the vulnerability in the economical design of its algorithmic
stablecoin UST, [79], and led to the fall of the DeFi protocols operating on Terra. In infrastructure layer attacks, such as
the attack on Terra, all DeFi stakeholders - service customers, liquidity providers (LPs), arbitrageurs, and governance
users - are fully exposed, as the attack ultimately leads to the loss of value of the victim blockchain with all deployed
smart contracts and tokens.

5.1.3 MEV Attacks. MEV attacks (Miner Extractable Value[78] attacks) refers to miners or validators benefiting from
their access to information about an upcoming transaction. The traditional financial market has been encountering
similar cases since the 1970s[81]. The blockchain, by design, allows validators to decide on the order of transactions in
the block. In MEV attacks, transactions are re-ordered for the benefit of validators at the expense of the initiator of the
victim transaction. Flash loans additionally increase the arbitrage revenue of the attackers [119]. MEV Attacks affect
the service customers and arbitrageurs at CLOB and AMM DEXs. Some liquid staking protocols incorporate revenue
from MEV attacks in the rewards tokens[43]. Depending on the re-ordering strategy, the MEV attacks can be classified
as follows:

      • Front-running attack - the validator inserts the transaction before the victim transaction; if the victim transaction
        does not settle, the attack is fatal.
      • Back-running attack - the validator’s transaction is executed after the victim transaction
      • Sandwich attack combines front- and back-running, as depicted in algorithms 5, 6.



Algorithm 5 Sandwich Price Attack[134]
 1: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐴 sets an order to buy token 𝑖 in exchange of token 𝑗 with current spot price 𝑝𝑖,𝑗 on an AMM with gas fee 𝑔1 .
 2: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐵 observes the mempool and sees the transaction.
 3: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐵 front-runs the transaction by buying 𝑥 𝐵 of token 𝑖 with a higher gas fee 𝑔2 > 𝑔1 on the same AMM.
                                                                                                  𝐵 and 𝑃 𝐴 , pushing XYZ’s
 4: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐵 and 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐴 ’s transactions are executed sequentially at respective average price of 𝑝𝑖,𝑗     𝑖,𝑗
    spot price up to 𝑝𝑖,𝑗∗ , where 𝑝 ∗ > 𝑝 𝐴 > 𝑝 𝐵 > 𝑝 due to slippage.

 5: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐵 back-runs by selling 𝑥 𝐵 of token 𝑖 at an average price of 𝑝 𝐵∗ , with 𝑝 ∗ > 𝑝 𝐵∗ > 𝑝 𝐵 due to slippage




  DeFi protocols cannot prevent MEV attacks, as they are initiated in the blockchain infrastructure layer. Multiple
approaches to mitigate transaction-ordering attacks have emerged, but all provide unsatisfactory results[92]. Considering
swap fees, slippage tolerance, and gas fees, MEV attacks are only profitable if the size of the victim transaction exceeds
a certain threshold[134]. Privacy-preserving blockchains with TEE[141], e.g., Integritee[15] or Secret Network[20],
prevent the transaction reordering from the infrastructure layer.


5.2    Smart-contract Layer-attacks
Smart contract attacks exploit vulnerabilities in DeFi protocols caused by coding mistakes, unsafe calls to untrusted
contracts, and access control mistakes. The audit of the DeFi protocol leads to a decrease in the probability of exploitation
by a factor of four.[139]. Bug bounties - reward programs for identifying software vulnerabilities - are a popular way to
help to prevent smart contract exploits[62]. Smart-contract Layer attacks affect all DeFi stakeholders.
                                                                                                   Manuscript submitted to ACM
22                                                                                                      Gogol, Killer, et al.

Algorithm 6 Sandwich LP Attack[134]
 1: 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐴 places a transaction order to buy 𝑥𝐴 of token 𝑖 in exchange of token 𝑗 with gas fee 𝑔1 on an AMM with
    reserves 𝑅𝑖 , 𝑅 𝑗 .
 2: 𝐿𝑃𝐵 observes the mempool and sees the transaction.
 3: 𝐿𝑃𝐵 front-runs by withdrawing liquidity from reserves 𝑅𝑖 and 𝑅 𝑗 with a higher gas fee 𝑔2 > 𝑔1 .
 4: 𝐿𝑃𝐵 and 𝑈 𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐴 ’s transactions are executed sequentially, resulting in a new composition of the pool.
 5: 𝐿𝑃𝐵 back-runs by re-providing the liquidity for 𝑅𝑖 and 𝑅 𝑗 . Due to the transaction, the LP needs to provide less of
      token 𝑗 for the same share in the liquidity pool.
 6: 𝐿𝑃𝐵 sells token 𝑗 for some token 𝑖 as profit.



5.3    Application Layer-attacks
Application layer attacks seek to exploit to vulnerabilities in the design of the DeFi protocols and affect all DeFi
stakeholders.

5.3.1 Oracle price manipulation. Oracle is a mechanism to retrieve the off-chain data, e.g., ETH/USD, which can be later
utilized by DeFi protocols smart contracts[107]. A centralized oracle relies on a trusted third party as a data provider.
Decentralized oracles seek the information on-chain, e.g., on DEXs, but are prone to price manipulation attacks 7.

Algorithm 7 Flash-loan-funded price oracle attack[134]
 1: Take a flash loan to borrow 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 from a lending platform, whose value is equivalent to 𝑥 𝑗 of token 𝑗 at
      market price.
 2: Swap 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 for 𝑥 𝑗 − Δ 𝑗 of token 𝑗 on an AMM, pushing the spot price 𝑝 𝑗,𝑖 down.
 3: Borrow 𝑥𝑖 + Δ𝑖 of token 𝑖 with 𝑥 𝑗 − Δ 𝑗 of token 𝑗 as collateral on a lending platform that uses the AMM as their
      sole price oracle.
 4: Repay the flash loan with 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 and gain a profit of Δ𝑖 of token 𝑖.




5.4    DeFi Risks
DeFi stakeholders 4 are exposed to various DeFi risks, e.g., liquidations, de-peg, impermanent loss, and slippage risk
3 that are specific to the underlying DeFi algorithm. The risk impact differs between the stakeholders and affects in
various levels service customers, LPs, arbitragers and governance users. Flash loans further amplify the losses of the
victim and increase the profits of the attackers.

5.4.1 Rug pull. A rug pull is a malicious activity in which developers abandon the project and use the capital raised
from the investors as a profit [110]. It affects permissionless DEXs, which do not verify the listed tokens. At the interest
rate protocols, crypto-backed stablecoins require the DAO vote to register new tokens as collateral, they are resistant to
rug pull attacks. Bridges and liquid staking protocols depend only on the native tokens, which can not be rug pulled.

5.4.2 Slippage risk. Slippage, the difference between the spot and realized price is a consequence of AMM, and therefore
occurs only at AMM DEX. Slippage risk affects only users executing trades - service customers and arbitrageurs - and
does not concern LPs. It depends on the size of AMM pool and affects all token pairs. Slippage losses can be amplified
by MEV attack.

5.4.3 Impermanent Loss. Impermanent loss is a consequence of AMM. It affects only LPs to AMM DEX and services
customers of yield farming protocols that employ liquidity provisions to AMM DEX in their strategy. Impermanent loss
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                       23

Algorithm 8 Rug Pull Attack[134]
    1: Mint a new token 𝑖.
    2: Create a liquidity pool with 𝑥𝑖 of token 𝑖 and 𝑥 𝑗 of a valuable token 𝑗 on an AMM.
    3: Attract unwitting traders to buy token 𝑖 with token 𝑗 from the pool, effectively changing the composition of the
      pool.
    4: Withdraw liquidity from the pool, and obtain 𝑥𝑖 − Δ𝑖 of token 𝑖 and 𝑥 𝑗 + Δ 𝑗 of token 𝑗 to take a profit of token 𝑗
      of the valuable token.



is amplified by crypto-currency volatility and can be avoided by providing liquidity to the token pairs with equal or
similar values: ısynthetic tokens targeting the same value (e.g., pair of USD stablecoins, SOL wrapped tokens), or (ii)
synthetic tokens and their target tokens (e.g., native tokens and rebase liquid staking tokens).

5.4.4 Liquidation risk. Liquidation risk affects service customers of DeFi lending protocols - interest rate protocols and
crypto-backed stablecoin - and is amplified by crypto-currency volatility.

5.4.5 De-peg risk. refers to the circumstances when the synthetic token loses the peg to the reference value. Con-
sequently. It affects all holders of synthetic tokens - stablecoins, wrapped tokens (bridges) and liquid staking tokens.
Particularly, it concerns LPs at DEX that provide liquidity for trading synthetic assets.


6     DISCUSSION
This section starts with lessons learned from the analysis of DeFi protocols regarding the TVL measure and differentiation
between CeFi and DeFi. Further, we present the current trends in DeFi protocol developments and conclude with key
challenges that need to be addressed before DeFi gains wider DeFi adoption.


6.1     Lessons learned
DeFi stakeholders, especially service customers and LPs need to be aware of the counter-party risk related to the DeFi
protocols. Clear differentiation between DeFi and CeFi is not straightforward nor clearly communicated by the protocols.
The DeFi risks - rug pull, slippage, impermanent loss, liquidation, and de-peg - need to be considered. Moreover, the
following aspects need consideration as well.

6.1.1 TVL as a measure of success. TVL, often used as a success measure in the DeFi, might be misleading for several
reasons. First, TVL is a measure of market-making capital locked in DeFi, rather than user activity or traded volume.
Second, some protocols, such as DEX aggregators, do not require locking any capital in order to provide services
to customers (e.g., optimal exchange prices at DEXs). Last, with the emergence of new algorithms e.g., concentrated
liquidity AMM, higher trading volumes at DEXs can be achieved with less capital locked in AMM pools.

6.1.2 CeFi vs DeFi. The framework for classification between CeFi or DeFi[118] is not always straightforward to
apply. Some protocols, e.g., CLOB DEX, fiat-backed stablecoins or tokenized real word assets (RWA), rely both on
the blockchain security and integrity as well as on off-chain counterparties. Furthermore, some DeFi protocols, e.g.,
crypto-backed stablecoins rely on the RWA assets and fiat-backed stablecoins, as they are included in the on-chain
reserves.
                                                                                                   Manuscript submitted to ACM
24                                                                                                       Gogol, Killer, et al.


6.2   Current trends
DeFi asset management concentrates on optimizing liquidity provision strategies. AMM DEX migrates to CL AMM
model for higher capital efficiency. Yield farming protocols look for optimal capital allocation between AMM pools.
DeFi vaults, also referred to as indexes are the new category of DeFi protocols that allow participants in the token pool,
allocated by the vault manager.

6.2.1 Concentrated Liquidity AMM. After the introduction of concentrated liquidity AMM, the liquidity provisions
strategy at CLAMM DEXs has attracted significantly more TVL compared to other yield farming strategies, $5.57b and
$1.15b respectively [11]. Tokens in a CLAMM DEX are deployed more efficiently, compared to AMM DEX, and allow
for higher transaction volume with lover TVL. Examples are the two largest DEXs on Solana: the largest DEX in terms
of transaction volume is the second largest DEX in terms of TVL.

6.2.2 DeFi Asset Management. There are many emerging DeFi protocols in the area of asset management. However,
their TVL is still low. Two categories worth mentioning included indexes and reserve currencies. The indexes protocols,
such as SetProtocol[44], Enzyme[31], allow DeFi users to create, manage and allocate tokens to vaults, which are similar
in their function to the funds and ETF in TradFi. Depositors transfer liquidity into the vault, whereas vault managers
allocated tokens to various DeFi protocols to generate yield. Reserve currency protocols function similarly. Depositors
transfer tokens into the managed vault. The difference is the valuation of the vault. In the case of the index protocols,
the value of the vault is equal to the value of all tokens in the vault. In the case of the reserve currency vault, the value
is determined by supply and demand.

6.3   Future Challenges
As presented in the risk sections, there are many open challenges hindering the wider DeFi adoption. Impermanent loss
makes the liquidity providing for new tokens unattractive and consequently increase the cost of new token launch. The
major obstacle to the lending protocol is over-collateralization which leads to lower capital efficiency and liquidation
risk of the collateral.

6.3.1 Impermanent Loss at AMM DEX. AMM-based DEX differentiates by utilizing various reserve curves and swap
fees, pool weightage, and liquidity mining, mainly in order to mitigate the impermanent loss for the LPs. Liquidity
mining refers to the process of collecting native tokens of the DeFi protocol in exchange for participating in the liquidity
pool and is a form of subsidizing AMM pools for the token designers. Most DEXs, like Uniswap[51] or Balancer[109],
offer 50/50 pool weightage, in which LPs must supply the equal value of each token in the liquidity pool. Whereas
Balancer[109] offers a variable pool supply criteria. ON Curve[80], the pool weightage is dynamic and does not rebalance
its pool. Pool weightage impacts impermanent loss. Further research on mitigation of impermanent loss, by applying
other AMM formula, or using on-chain derives, is required.

6.3.2 Over-collateralized Lending. Although DeFi over-collateralized lending mitigates the risks arising from the
anonymous borrowers, it exposes the borrower to the liquidation risk and does not allow to use of the digital asset
locked as collateral. Decentralized prime brokerage and on-chain identity - present alternative models for the DeFi
undercollateralized lending [60]. Decentralized prime brokerage protocols - Oxygen[40], DeltaPrime[29], Gearbox[32] -
retain the control over the use of the borrowed funds and identity-based protocols - TrueFi[48], Goldfinch[34] provide
the mapping between on-chain borrowers and real-world entities.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                                      25


6.3.3 Security vs Credit. Lending protocols compete with the staking process in PoS BC, consequently damaging the
network security [69, 72, 73]. When the yield provided by the lending protocols is more attractive than the staking rate
(inflation rate), stakers are incentivized to remove their staked tokens and lend them out, thus reducing the network
security [72]. MEV-redistribution improves the network security by redistributing MEV revenue and disincentivizing to
unstake[73]. Some liquid staking protocols, e.g., RocketPool[43], include in their tokens MEV rewards, generated by the
validators. The risk of liquid staking includes not only slashing risk, typically for staking, but also de-peg risk, inherent
to the synthetic tokens.

6.3.4 Bridges. Full collateralization of wrapped tokens is inefficient, but over-collateralization is required due to the
volatility of digital assets [63]. With progress in blockchain interoperability and scalability, multi-chain DEX emerged
such as THORChain[1]. They offer swaps of digital assets between BCs.

6.3.5 Synthetic assets de-peg. In 2023, the liquid staking protocol Lido[3] overtook the decentralized stablecoin protocol
MakerDAO [108], and became the largest DeFi protocol in terms of TVL[11]. As indicated in this work, little research
has been performed on synthetic assets other than stablecoins. Wrapped tokens and liquid staking tokens are gaining
popularity in DeFi, but are exposed to de-peg risk amond other. The stability of their promised peg, especially the
inclusion of staking rewards, requires empirical examinations.

7     SUMMARY
This paper analyzes the major categories of DeFi protocols that represent over 89% of TVL. Both the technical and
economical design of DeFi protocols are examined. Our analysis shows that any DeFi protocol can be classified into one
of three classes: (i) liquidity pool protocols (ii) synthetic token protocols or (iii) aggregator. Liquidity pool protocols
manage the supply and demand sites with smart contracts, e.g., interest rate protocols manage supply and demand for
loanable funds, and vAMM / AMM DEXs manage supply and demand for tradeable tokens and derivatives. Synthetic
token protocol issues tokens with a value pegged to the reference value, e.g., stablecoins (peg to the fiat currency),
wrapped tokens (peg to the tokens on other blockchains), liquid staking tokens (peg to the staked tokens, and staking
rewards), or index tokens. Aggregators optimize the liquidity provision strategies across DeFi protocols (yield farming
protocols) or best trade execution at DEX (DEX aggregators). Our taxonomy for the chain architecture of DeFi protocols
suggests that DeFi cannot be defined as a smart contract-enabled financial application, but a more general definition is
required that is based on the security and integrity of blockchains. Finally, we showed that the risk in DeFi depends on
three dimensions: (i) DeFi agents, (ii) DeFi protocols, and (iii) tokens involved. We indicated specifically that service
customers and LPs are exposed to different risks, and aggregator protocols accumulate the risk of the protocols and
tokens they utilize.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported partially by (a) the University of Zürich UZH, Switzerland, and (b) DeFiAM, Switzerland. The
authors thank Narwah, and other digital asset managers for helpful conversations on the topic.

REFERENCES
    [1] [n. d.]. THORChain. https://docs.thorchain.org/how-it-works/understanding-thorchain
    [2] 2020. Aave - Protocol Whitepaper V1.0. Technical Report.
    [3] 2020. Lido: Ethereum Liquid Staking Whitepaper. https://lido.fi/static/Lido:Ethereum-Liquid-Staking.pdf
    [4] 2021. Programming AMMs on top of UniV3. Technical Report.
                                                                                                                  Manuscript submitted to ACM
26                                                                                                                          Gogol, Killer, et al.


  [5] 2021. What Are Blockchain Bridges, and Why are they Important for DeFi? https://blog.makerdao.com/what-are-blockchain-bridges-and-why-
      are-they-important-for-defi/
  [6] 2022. Arbitrum. https://arbitrum.io/
  [7] 2022. Binance - Cryptocurrency Exchange. https://www.binance.com/en
  [8] 2022. Binance Smart Chain. https://www.bnbchain.org/en/smartChain
  [9] 2022. CoinBase cbETH Whitepaper. https://www.coinbase.com/cbeth/whitepaper
 [10] 2022. Cosmos. https://cosmos.network/
 [11] 2022. DeFi Llama. https://defillama.com/
 [12] 2022. DeFi Llama Categories. https://defillama.com/categories
 [13] 2022. DeFi Llama Chains. https://defillama.com/chains
 [14] 2022. FTX Dossier . Crypto Valley Journal (11 2022). https://cvj.ch/en/focus/background/ftx-dossier/
 [15] 2022. Integritee. https://integritee.network/
 [16] 2022. Kraken Cryptocurrency Exchange. https://www.kraken.com/
 [17] 2022. L2Beat Bridges TVL. https://l2beat.com/bridges/tvl
 [18] 2022. L2Beat Layer2 TVL. https://l2beat.com/scaling/tvl
 [19] 2022. Polakdot. https://polkadot.network/
 [20] 2022. Secret Network. https://scrt.network/
 [21] 2022. Solana. https://solana.com/
 [22] 2022. starknet. (2022). https://starkware.co/starknet/
 [23] 2022. Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/377382/bitcoin-market-capitalization/
 [24] 2022. Statista DeFi Users. https://www.statista.com/statistics/1297745/defi-user-number/
 [25] 2022. zkSync. https://zksync.io/
 [26] 2023. A wrap-up on designing liquid staking protocols:. https://twitter.com/FigmentCapital/status/1567324278906933250
 [27] 2023. Ampleforth.
 [28] 2023. BendDAO. https://www.benddao.xyz/en/
 [29] 2023. DeltaPrime. https://deltaprime.io/
 [30] 2023. Dune DEX metrics. https://dune.com/hagaetc/dex-metrics
 [31] 2023. Enzyme. https://enzyme.finance/
 [32] 2023. Gearbox. https://gearbox.fi/
 [33] 2023. GMX. https://gmx.io/#/
 [34] 2023. Goldfinch.
 [35] 2023. Liquity. https://www.liquity.org/
 [36] 2023. Marinade. https://docs.marinade.finance/
 [37] 2023. MCDEX. https://www.coinbase.com/price/mcdex
 [38] 2023. NFTFi. https://www.nftfi.com/
 [39] 2023. Optimism. https://www.optimism.io/
 [40] 2023. Oxygen. https://www.oxygen.org/
 [41] 2023. Perpetual Protocol. https://perp.com/
 [42] 2023. Polygon. https://polygon.technology/
 [43] 2023. RocketPool. https://docs.rocketpool.net/guides/staking/overview.html
 [44] 2023. SetProtocol. https://www.tokensets.com/
 [45] 2023. StakeWise. https://docs.stakewise.io/
 [46] 2023. Terra. https://www.terra.money/
 [47] 2023. Tron. https://tron.network/
 [48] 2023. TrueFi. https://truefi.io/
 [49] 2023. Vendor Finance. https://docs.vendor.finance/overview/what-is-vendor-finance
 [50] 2023. Wrapped Bitcoins. https://wbtc.network/
 [51] Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, and Dan Robinson. 2020. Uniswap v2 Core. Technical Report.
 [52] Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, Moody Salem moody, uniswaporg River Keefer, and Dan Robinson. 2021. Uniswap v3 Core. Technical Report.
 [53] Carol Alexander, Jaehyuk Choi, Heungju Park, and Sungbin Sohn. 2019. BitMEX Bitcoin Derivatives: Price Discovery, Informational Efficiency and
      Hedging Effectiveness. Technical Report. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3353583
 [54] Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, and Tarun Chitra. 2021. A Note on Bundle Profit Maximization. Technical Report.
 [55] Guillermo Angeris, Alex Evans, Tarun Chitra, and Stephen Boyd. 2022. Optimal Routing for Constant Function Market Makers. In EC 2022 -
      Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation. Association for Computing Machinery, Inc, 115–128. https://doi.org/10.
      1145/3490486.3538336


Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                                                      27


[56] Thomas Ankenbrand, Denis Bieri, Roland Cortivo, Johannes Hoehener, and Thomas Hardjono. 2020. Proposal for a Comprehensive (Crypto) Asset
     Taxonomy. In Proceedings - 2020 Crypto Valley Conference on Blockchain Technology, CVCBT 2020. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
     Inc., 16–26. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVCBT50464.2020.00006
[57] Sirio Aramonte, Sebastian Doerr, Wenqian Huang, and Andreas Schrimpf. 2022. BIS Bulletin No 57 DeFi lending: intermediation without information?
     www.bis.org
[58] Raphael Auer, Bernhard Haslhofer, Stefan Kitzler, Pietro Saggese, and Friedhelm Victor. 2023. The Technology of Decentralized Finance (DeFi).
     Technical Report. www.bis.org
[59] Bajpai P. 2022. Cryptocurrency Future. https://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/012215/how-invest-bitcoin-exchange-futures.asp
[60] Baker Lucas. 2022. Paradigms for on chain credit. https://jumpcrypto.com/paradigms-for-on-chain-credit/
[61] Berenzon D. 2021. Blockchain Bridges: Building Networks of Cryptonetworks. https://medium.com/1kxnetwork/blockchain-bridges-5db6afac44f8
[62] Lorenz Breidenbach, Florian Tramer, Ari Juels, Cornell Tech, Eth Zürich Philip Daian, Florian Tramèr, and Stanford Ari Juels. 2018. Enter the Hydra:
     Towards Principled Bug Bounties and Exploit-Resistant Smart Contracts. https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1090
[63] Theodore Bugnet and Alexei Zamyatin. 2022. XCC: Theft-Resilient and Collateral-Optimized Cryptocurrency-Backed Assets. Technical Report.
     https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/113
[64] Dirk Bullmann, Jonas Klemm, and Andrea Pinna. 2019. Occasional Paper Series In search for stability in crypto-assets: are stablecoins the solution?
     Technical Report. https://doi.org/10.2866/969389
[65] Vitalik Buterin. 2014. Ethereum: A Next-Generation Smart Contract and Decentralized Application Platform. Technical Report.
[66] Buterin V. 2016. Let’s run on-chain decentralized exchanges the way we run prediction markets. https://www.reddit.com/r/ethereum/comments/
     55m04x/lets_run_onchain_decentralized_exchanges_the_way/
[67] Giulio Caldarelli. 2022. Wrapping trust for interoperability: A preliminary study of wrapped tokens. https://doi.org/10.3390/info13010006
[68] Francesca Carapella, Edward Dumas, Jacob Gerszten, Nathan Swem, and Larry Wall. 2022. Decentralized Finance (DeFi): Transformative Potential
     & Associated Risks. (2022). https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.057
[69] Sylvain Carré and Franck Gabriel. 2022. Security and Credit in Proof-of-Stake DeFi Protocols *. Technical Report. https://ssrn.com/abstract=4307207
[70] David Chaum, Christian Grothoff, and Thomas Moser. 2021. How to issue a central bank digital currency; How to issue a central bank digital currency.
     Technical Report.
[71] Huashan Chen, Marcus Pendleton, Laurent Njilla, and Shouhuai Xu. 2019. A Survey on Ethereum Systems Security: Vulnerabilities, Attacks and
     Defenses. (8 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.04507
[72] Tarun Chitra. 2020. Competitive Equilibria Between Staking and On-chain Lending License. Technical Report. https://cryptoeconomicsystems.
     pubpub.org/pub/chitra-staking-lending-equilibria/release/6?readingCollection=c65922bd
[73] Tarun Chitra and Kshitij Kulkarni. 2022. Improving Proof of Stake Economic Security via MEV Redistribution. Technical Report.
[74] Jonathan Chiu, Emre Ozdenoren, Kathy Yuan, and Shengxing Zhang. 2022. On the Fragility of DeFi Lending. Technical Report. https://g20.org/wp-
     content/uploads/2022/02/FSB-Report-on-Assessment-of-Risks-to-Financial-
[75] Mauro Conti, Ankit Gangwal, and Michele Todero. 2019. Blockchain trilemma solver algorand has dilemma over undecidable messages. In ACM
     International Conference Proceeding Series. Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3339252.3339255
[76] Simon Cousaert, Jiahua Xu, and Toshiko Matsui. 2021. SoK: Yield Aggregators in DeFi. (5 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2105.13891
[77] Simon Cousaert, Jiahua Xu, and Toshiko Matsui. 2022. SoK: Yield Aggregators in DeFi. In IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and
     Cryptocurrency, ICBC 2022. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBC54727.2022.9805523
[78] Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breidenbach, and Ari Juels. 2019. Flash Boys 2.0:
     Frontrunning, Transaction Reordering, and Consensus Instability in Decentralized Exchanges. (4 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05234
[79] Adrien D’avernas, Vincent Maurin, Quentin Vandeweyer, Joseph Abadi, Markus Brunnermeier, Darrell Duffie, Fran(c)cois Gourio, Zhiguo He,
     Jiasun Li, Ye Li, Simon Mayer, Valentin Schubert, Fabrice Tourre, Anton Tsoy, Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj, and Anthony Lee Zhang. 2022. Can
     Stablecoins be Stable? *. Technical Report. https://bfi.uchicago.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/BFI_WP_2022-131.pdf
[80] Michael Egorov. 2021. Curve Whitepaper: Automatic market-making with dynamic peg. Technical Report.
[81] Shayan Eskandari, Seyedehmahsa Moosavi, and Jeremy Clark. 2019. SoK: Transparent Dishonesty: front-running attacks on Blockchain. (2 2019).
     http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.05164
[82] Fernando J. 2022. Derivatives: Types, Considerations, and Pros and Cons. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/derivative.asp
[83] Pierluigi Freni, Enrico Ferro, and Roberto Moncada. 2022. Tokenomics and blockchain tokens: A design-oriented morphological framework.
     Blockchain: Research and Applications 3, 1 (3 2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcra.2022.100069
[84] Ankit Gangwal, Haripriya Ravali Gangavalli, and Apoorva Thirupathi. 2022. A Survey of Layer-Two Blockchain Protocols. (4 2022). http:
     //arxiv.org/abs/2204.08032
[85] Aaron Green, Christopher Cammilleri, John S Erickson, Oshani Seneviratne, and Kristin P Bennett. 2022. DeFi Survival Analysis: Insights into Risks
     and User Behaviors The Rensselaer Institute for Data Exploration and Applications Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Technical Report. http://idea.rpi.edu
[86] Lewis Gudgeon, Sam Werner, Daniel Perez, and William J. Knottenbelt. 2020. DeFi Protocols for Loanable Funds: Interest Rates, Liquidity and
     Market Efficiency. In AFT 2020 - Proceedings of the 2nd ACM Conference on Advances in Financial Technologies. Association for Computing Machinery,
     Inc, 92–112. https://doi.org/10.1145/3419614.3423254
[87] Robin Hanson. 2002. Logarithmic Market Scoring Rules for Modular Combinatorial Information Aggregation. Technical Report. http://hanson.gmu.edu
                                                                                                                             Manuscript submitted to ACM
28                                                                                                                             Gogol, Killer, et al.


 [88] Sakib Haque, Zachary Eberhart, Aakash Bansal, and Collin McMillan. 2022. Semantic Similarity Metrics for Evaluating Source Code Summarization.
      In IEEE International Conference on Program Comprehension, Vol. 2022-March. IEEE Computer Society, 36–47. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.
      nnnnnnn
 [89] Thomas Hardjono. 2021. Blockchain Gateways, Bridges and Delegated Hash-Locks. (2 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.03933
 [90] Lioba Heimbach, Eric Schertenleib, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2022. Risks and Returns of Uniswap V3 Liquidity Providers. (5 2022). http:
      //arxiv.org/abs/2205.08904
 [91] Lioba Heimbach, Ye Wang, and Roger Wattenhofer. 2021. Behavior of Liquidity Providers in Decentralized Exchanges. (5 2021). http://arxiv.org/
      abs/2105.13822
 [92] Lioba Heimbach and Roger Wattenhofer. 2022. SoK: Preventing Transaction Reordering Manipulations in Decentralized Finance. (3 2022).
      http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11520
 [93] Hugo Inzirillo and Stanislas de Quenetain. 2022. Managing Risk in DeFi Portfolios. (5 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14699
 [94] Johannes Rude Jensen and Omri Ross. 2021. HOW DECENTRALIZED IS THE GOVERNANCE OF BLOCKCHAIN-BASED FINANCE? Technical Report.
      https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.10096
 [95] Johannes Rude Jensen, Victor Von Wachter, and Omri Ross. 2021. An Introduction to Decentralized Finance (DeFi). (2021). https://doi.org/10.7250/
      csimq.2021-26.03
 [96] Antonio Juliano. 2017. dYdX: A Standard for Decentralized Margin Trading and Derivatives. Technical Report. http://www.investopedia.com/ask/
      answers/052715/how-big-derivatives-market.asp
 [97] Yujin Kwon, Jihee Kim, Yongdae Kim, Dawn Song, We thank Yang-yim Heo, Hyejin Oh, Kyeong-neung Koo, Soobin Lee, Yonggon Kim, Chanjoong
      Kwon, Taegyoung Lee, Yonghwan Jo, Francisco Santos, Jack Kim, Hee Su Roh, Yongho Choi, and Seungwon Jeong. 2021. The Trilemma of Stablecoin.
      Technical Report. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3917430
 [98] Mauricio Labadie. 2022. Impermanent loss and slippage in Automated Market Makers (AMMs) with constant-product formula. Technical Report.
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=4053924
 [99] Olga Labazova. 2019. Towards a Framework for Evaluation of Blockchain. Technical Report. 1 pages.
[100] Pascal Lafourcade and Marius Lombard-Platet. 2020. About Blockchain Interoperability. Technical Report. https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/643
[101] Sung-Shine Lee, Alexandr Murashkin, Martin Derka, and Jan Gorzny. 2022. SoK: Not Quite Water Under the Bridge: Review of Cross-Chain Bridge
      Hacks. (10 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.16209
[102] Alfred Lehar and Christine A Parlour. 2022. Systemic Fragility in Decentralized Markets. Technical Report. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
      cfm?abstract_id=4164833
[103] Wenkai Li, Jiuyang Bu, Xiaoqi Li, and Xianyi Chen. 2022. Security Analysis of DeFi: Vulnerabilities, Attacks and Advances. (5 2022). http:
      //arxiv.org/abs/2205.09524
[104] Lindsay X Lin. 2019. DECONSTRUCTING DECENTRALIZED EXCHANGES. Technical Report. https://www.airswap.io
[105] Shaofeng Lin, Yihan Kong, and Shaotao Nie. 2021. Overview of Block Chain Cross Chain Technology. In Proceedings - 2021 13th International
      Conference on Measuring Technology and Mechatronics Automation, ICMTMA 2021. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 357–360.
      https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMTMA52658.2021.00083
[106] Alex Lipton, Artur Sepp Sila, and Sygnum Bank. 2021. Automated Market-Making for Fiat Currencies. Technical Report. https://defipulse.com/
      uniswap,
[107] Bowen Liu, Pawel Szalachowski, and Jianying Zhou. 2020. A First Look into DeFi Oracles. (5 2020). http://arxiv.org/abs/2005.04377
[108] MakerDAO Team. 2017. The DAI Stablecoin System. Technical Report. https://makerdao.com/
[109] Mushegia N Martinelli F. 2019. Balancer Whitepaper: A non-custodial portfolio manager, liquidity provider, and price sensor. (2019).
[110] Bruno Mazorra, Victor Adan, and Vanesa Daza. 2022. Do not rug on me: Zero-dimensional Scam Detection. (1 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07220
[111] Patrick Mccorry, Chris Buckland, Bennet Yee, and Dawn Song. 2021. SoK: Validating Bridges as a Scaling Solution for Blockchains. Technical Report.
      https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/1589
[112] Peter Mell. 2022. Understanding Stablecoin Technology and Related Security Considerations. Technical Report. National Institute of Standards and
      Technology. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8408.ipd
[113] Amani Moin, Emin Gün Sirer, and Kevin Sekniqi. 2019. A Classification Framework for Stablecoin Designs. (9 2019). http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.10098
[114] Satoshi Nakamoto. 2008. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. Technical Report. www.bitcoin.org
[115] Michael Neuder, Rithvik Rao, Daniel J. Moroz, and David C. Parkes. 2021. Strategic Liquidity Provision in Uniswap v3. (6 2021). http:
      //arxiv.org/abs/2106.12033
[116] Ricsson Ngo. 2021. Timeswap First Fully Decentralized AMM based Money Market Protocol. Technical Report. https://timeswap.io/whitepaper.pdf
[117] Daniel Perez, Sam M. Werner, Jiahua Xu, and Benjamin Livshits. 2020. Liquidations: DeFi on a Knife-edge. (9 2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
      662-64331-0{_}24
[118] Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, Yaroslav Afonin, Ludovico Lazzaretti, and Arthur Gervais. 2021. CeFi vs. DeFi – Comparing Centralized to Decentralized
      Finance. (6 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08157
[119] Kaihua Qin, Liyi Zhou, Benjamin Livshits, and Arthur Gervais. 2020. Attacking the DeFi Ecosystem with Flash Loans for Fun and Profit. (3 2020).
      http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.03810


Manuscript submitted to ACM
SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) - Fundamentals, Taxonomy and Risks                                                                                 29


[120] Abrar Rahman, Victor Shi, Matthew Ding, and Elliot Choi. 2022. Systematization of Knowledge: Synthetic Assets, Derivatives, and On-Chain
      Portfolio Management. (9 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2209.09958
[121] Robert Leshner and Geoffrey Hayes. 2019. Compound: The Money Market Protocol. Technical Report. https://docs.google.com/document/d/
      1KoXEEYg4YAaPacS4dudPuFZwgAX0Swv9Yi7-iE4C5JU/edit#
[122] Kanis Saengchote. 2022. Decentralized lending and its users: Insights from Compound. Technical Report. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3925344
[123] Saradon A. 2022. MYSO v1 Core A Trust-Minimized Protocol for Zero-Liquidation Loans. Technical Report. https://github.com/mysofinance/v1-
      core-whitepaper/blob/main/MYSO_v1___Whitepaper.pdf
[124] Aetienne Sardon. 2021. Zero-Liquidation Loans: A Structured Product Approach to DeFi Lending. (10 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2110.13533
[125] Fabian Schär. 2021. Decentralized finance: on blockchain-and smart contract-based financial markets. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 103,
      2 (2021), 153–174. https://doi.org/10.20955/r.103.153-74
[126] Stefan Scharnowski and Hossein Jahanshahloo. 2022. Liquid Staking: Basis Determinants and Price Discovery. Technical Report. https://ssrn.com/
      abstract=4180341
[127] Drew Stone. 2021. Trustless, privacy-preserving blockchain bridges. (2 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.04660
[128] Neelesh Tiruviluamala, Alexander Port, and Erik Lewis. 2022. A General Framework for Impermanent Loss in Automated Market Makers. (3 2022).
      http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.11352
[129] Gerry Tsoukalas and Brett Hemenway Falk. 2020. Token-weighted crowdsourcing. Management Science 66, 9 (9 2020), 3843–3859. https:
      //doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2019.3515
[130] Gang Wang. 2021. SoK: Exploring Blockchains Interoperability. Technical Report. https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/537
[131] Will Warren and Amir Bandeali. 2017. 0x: An open protocol for decentralized exchange on the Ethereum blockchain. Technical Report.
[132] Sam M. Werner, Daniel Perez, Lewis Gudgeon, Ariah Klages-Mundt, Dominik Harz, and William J. Knottenbelt. 2021. SoK: Decentralized Finance
      (DeFi). (1 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2101.08778
[133] Jiahua Xu and Yebo Feng. 2022. Reap the Harvest on Blockchain: A Survey of Yield Farming Protocols. (10 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.04194
[134] Jiahua Xu, Krzysztof Paruch, Simon Cousaert, and Yebo Feng. 2021. SoK: Decentralized Exchanges (DEX) with Automated Market Maker (AMM)
      Protocols. (3 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12732
[135] Teng Andrea Xu and Jiahua Xu. 2022. A Short Survey on Business Models of Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Protocols. (2 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/
      2202.07742
[136] Alexei Zamyatin, Dominik Harz, Joshua Lind, Panayiotis Panayiotou, Arthur Gervais, and William Knottenbelt. 2019. XCLAIM: Trustless,
      Interoperable, Cryptocurrency-Backed Assets. Technical Report. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8835387
[137] Ryan Zarick, Bryan Pellegrino, and Caleb Banister. 2021. Delta: Solving the Bridging Trilemma. Technical Report.
[138] Liyi Zhou, Kaihua Qin, and Arthur Gervais. 2021. A2MM: Mitigating Frontrunning, Transaction Reordering and Consensus Instability in
      Decentralized Exchanges. (6 2021). http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07371
[139] Liyi Zhou, Xihan Xiong, Jens Ernstberger, Stefanos Chaliasos, Zhipeng Wang, Ye Wang, Kaihua Qin, Roger Wattenhofer, Dawn Song, and Arthur
      Gervais. 2022. SoK: Decentralized Finance (DeFi) Attacks. (8 2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/2208.13035
[140] Aneesh Zutshi, Antonio Grilo, and Tahereh Nodehi. 2021. The value proposition of blockchain technologies and its impact on Digital Platforms.
      Computers and Industrial Engineering 155 (5 2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2021.107187
[141] Guy Zyskind, Oz Nathan, and Alex Sandy Pentland. 2015. Decentralizing privacy: Using blockchain to protect personal data. In Proceedings - 2015
      IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, SPW 2015. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 180–184. https://doi.org/10.1109/SPW.2015.27


Received 1 June 2023




                                                                                                                         Manuscript submitted to ACM
