           Volume 7, Number 2, Special Issue, 2010
                         Novi Sad




  Computer Science and Information Systems




                             ISSN: 1820-0214


                        ComSIS Journal is sponsored by:

    Ministry of Science and Technological Development of Republic of Serbia -
                           http://www.nauka.gov.rs/lat

Polskie Towarzystwo Informatyczne - PTI (Polish Information Processing Society) -
                            http://www.pti.org.pl/
                                   Computer Science and
                                   Information Systems
                                   AIMS AND SCOPE

Computer Science and Information Systems (ComSIS) is an international refereed journal, pub-
lished in Serbia. The objective of ComSIS is to communicate important research and development
results in the areas of computer science, software engineering, and information systems.
We publish original papers of lasting value covering both theoretical foundations of computer
science and commercial, industrial, or educational aspects that provide new insights into design
and implementation of software and information systems. ComSIS also welcomes surveys papers
that contribute to the understanding of emerging and important fields of computer science.
Regular columns of the journal cover reviews of newly published books, presentations of selected
PhD and master theses, as well as information on forthcoming professional meetings. In addition
to wide-scope regular issues, ComSIS also includes special issues covering specific topics in all
areas of computer science and information systems.
ComSIS publishes invited and regular papers in English. Papers that pass a strict reviewing
procedure are accepted for publishing. The acceptance rate so far was approximately 40%.
ComSIS is published semiannually.

                                  Indexing Information
ComSIS is indexed and abstracted in the following:
˹ Science Citation Index Expanded (also known as SciSearch) and Journal Citation Reports /
  Science Edition by Thomson Reuters,
˹ Computer Science Bibliography, University of Trier (DBLP),
˹ EMBASE (Elsevier),
˹ Scopus (Elsevier),
˹ Summon (Serials Solutions),
˹ Selected for coverage in EBSCO bibliographic databases,
˹ Selected for coverage in IET bibliographic database Inspec, starting with 2009 published
  material,
˹ Selected for coverage in FIZ Karlsruhe bibliographic database io-port,
˹ Google Scholar,
˹ Center for Evaluation in Education and Science and Ministry of Science of Republic of Serbia
  (CEON) in cooperation with the National Library of Serbia,
˹ Serbian Citation Index (SCIndeks),
˹ doiSerbia.

                              Information for Contributors
The Editors will be pleased to receive contributions from all parts of the world. An electronic
version (MS Word), or three hard-copies of the manuscript written in English, intended for
publication and prepared as described in "Manuscript Requirements" (which may be downloaded
from http://www.comsis.org), along with a cover letter containing the corresponding author's
details should be sent to one of the Editors.
Criteria for Acceptance
Criteria for acceptance will be appropriateness to the field of Journal, as described in the Aims
and Scope, taking into account the merit of the content and presentation. There is no page limit
on manuscripts submitted.
Manuscripts will be refereed in the manner customary with scientific journals before being
accepted for publication.
Copyright and Use Agreement
All authors are requested to sign the "Transfer of Copyright" agreement before the paper may be
published. The copyright transfer covers the exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute the
paper, including reprints, photographic reproductions, microform, electronic form, or any other
reproductions of similar nature and translations. Authors are responsible for obtaining from the
copyright holder permission to reproduce the paper or any part of it, for which copyright exists.
            Computer Science and Information Systems

      Volume 7, Number 2, Special Issue, April 2010

CONTENTS

Editorial

Guest Editorial

Papers
247      Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages:
         An Empirical Study
         7RPDå.RVDU1XQR2OLYHLUD0DUMDQ0HUQLN0DULD-RmR9DUDQGD
         3HUHLUD0DWHMýUHSLQãHN'DQLHODGD&UX], Pedro Rangel
         Henriques
265      VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute
         Grammars
         Nuno Oliveira, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Pedro Rangel Henriques,
         Daniela da Cruz, Bastian Cramer
291      Annotation Based Parser Generator
         -DURVODY3RUXElQ0LFKDO)RUJiþ, Miroslav Sabo, 0DUHN%ČKiOHN
309      On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics
         0DWHMýUHSLQãHN7RPDå.RVDU0DUMDQ0HUQLN, Julien Cervelle, Rémi
         Forax, Gilles Roussel
331      Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata
         7RPiã)ORXUL-DQ-DQRXãHN%RĜivoj Melichar
359      A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and
         Complex Functionalities of Business Applications
         ,YDQ/XNRYLü$OHNVDQGDU3RSRYLü-RYR 0RVWLüDQG6RQMD5LVWLü
                                  EDITORIAL


Due to a considerably increasing interest of the authors for ComSIS in recent
two years, we may say that this seventh year of publishing is a challenging
one for a whole Editorial Board in many aspects. This is the first year in which
we decided to publish two extra special issues, apart from two regular ones.
The one of them, titled Advances in Languages, Related Technologies and
Applications, is in front of you. We created it with a hope to provide
exchanging useful research ideas and experiences in the area of
programming and domain specific languages, and compilers.

On behalf of the ComSIS Consortium, let us use this opportunity to give our
thanks to the reviewers and all of the authors for their high-quality work and
remarkable enthusiasm. Above all, let us give great thanks to the guest
editors, António Menezes Leitao and Boštjan Slivnik, who invested a lot of
their efforts in creation of this special issue, as well as to Maria Ganzha,
Marcin Paprzycki (WAPL'2009), and Pedro Rangel Henriques (CoRTA'2009),
for their fruitful organizational support.




Mirjana Ivanoviü,                                        Ivan Lukoviü,
Editor-in-Chief                                          Vice-Editor-in-Chief




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                 i
                      GUEST EDITOR’S MESSAGE


Programming languages are the most fundamental form of expression for
programmers. Compilers are, therefore, the most important tools to turn into
action the ideas expressed in a programming language. At the same time, the
fields of Computer Science and Software Engineering are becoming broader
every day. New programming languages must support, in the most simple and
economic way possible, the expression of new ideas in Computer Science
and of ever more complex designs in Software Engineering. Likewise,
compilers should be able to effectively implement new programming language
constructs, both from the programmer’s as well as from the final user’s point
of view.

This special issue contains revised and expanded versions of the best papers
presented either at the Conference on Compilers, Programming Languages,
Related Technologies and Applications (CoRTA’2009) or at the Workshop on
Advances in Programming Languages (WAPL’09). The former, organized by
the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon, took place on September
10-11, 2009 in Lisbon, Portugal. The latter was a workshop of an International
Multiconference on Computer and Information Technology (IMCSIT’2009)
which was organized by Polish Information Processing Society and took place
in Mragowo, Poland on October 12–14, 2009.

But just as one of the events took place near the geographical center of
Europe and the other took place at the continent’s extreme point where
centuries ago European expansion around the globe started, so the papers of
this special issue address, on one hand, the most central questions in
contemporary research and, on the other hand, extend them to the edge of
research.

As the names of both events suggest, they shared a similar scope. The list of
suggested topics included, among others
    x compiling techniques,
    x domain-specific languages,
    x programming language concept design,
    x formal techniques and tools, and
    x automata theory and applications.
The program committees of both events were pleased to observe that
theoretical and practical papers were submitted, providing them the
opportunity to produce a balanced selection of both kinds of papers.

At the end of both events, the best papers submitted were selected for
possible publication in a special issue of ComSIS and their authors were




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                             iii
invited to prepare extended versions of their papers. These extended versions
were then reviewed by experts in the field. In order to ensure the best
possible quality, the improved papers were then submitted to a second round
of reviewing.

The paper Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An
Empirical Study by Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João
Varanda Pereira, Matej ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel
Henriques, describes an experiment that was carried out to clarify whether
domain-specific languages have significant advantages over general-purpose
languages for the construction of graphical user interfaces. The comparison
between languages was done using the Cognitive Dimension Framework and
the experiment shows that domain-specific languages are indeed
advantageous, thus settling an important question in the programming
language research area.

The paper VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars
by Nuno Oliveira, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Pedro Henriques, Daniela da
Cruz, and Bastian Cramer, discusses the design of a new visual language for
attribute grammars and the development of the associated programming
environment. The author’s solution is based on the use of DEVil, a system
that generates a visual programming environment from high-level
specifications. This solution is a relevant contribution that combines concepts
from the areas of Program Comprehension, Attribute Grammars and Visual
languages.

Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ and Miroslav Sabo contributed a paper
entitled Annotation Based Parser Generator. It describes a parser generator
which focuses on the abstract grammar: the parser is generated from the
annotations associated with Java classes specifying the abstract syntax.
Hence, by simply changing annotations one can produce parsers for different
concrete grammars that all correspond to the same abstract syntax.

The paper On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics by Matej
ýrepinšek, Tomaž Kosar, Marjan Mernik, Julien Carvelle, Rémi Forax and
Gilles Roussel concentrates on grammar metrics. In other words, how
programming languages can be compared based on their syntactic structure
and what a programming language designer can learn from it.

Another paper, Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata by Tomas Flouri,
Jan Janousek, and Borivoj Melichar, is about a subtree matching, a problem
which often appears in compiler technology as trees are widely used for
internal representations of all kinds. In this particular case, the problem has
been solved using a pushdown automaton, another formalism known well to
the compiler writers.




iv                                ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
Finally, the paper A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and
Complex Functionalities of Business Applications, by Ivan Lukoviü,
Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü, is about a domain specific
language for specifying check constraints and a tool that enables visually
oriented design and parsing check constraints.

As guest editors, we would like to thank the authors for their valuable
contribution to this special issue, and the referees for their dedicated work and
high-quality remarks that helped improve the papers. Furthermore, we would
like to thank the members of both program committees as they have carried
out the first and thus the most painful selection of submitted papers, and to
the organizers of both events, namely CoRTA’2009 and WAPL’09 and, by
extension, to the organizers of the main conferences, namely, INForum’2009
and IMCSIT’2009.

Finally, we are grateful to Prof. Ivan Lukoviü, Vice Editor-in-Chief of ComSIS,
who provided unlimited support and assistance during the selection and
reviewing process that culminated in this special issue.




                                                    Boštjan Slivnik
                                                    António Menezes Leitao
                                                    Guest Editors




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                v
UDC 004.438, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002247K


     Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific
            Languages: An Empirical Study

     Tomaž Kosar1, Nuno Oliveira2, Marjan Mernik1, Maria João Varanda
Pereira3, Matej ýrepinšek1, Daniela da Cruz2, and Pedro Rangel Henriques2
      1
          University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
                            Smetanova 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
                    {tomaz.kosar, marjan.mernik, matej.crepinsek}@uni-mb.si
                     2 University of Minho - Department of Computer Science,

                        Campus de Gualtar, 4715-057, Braga, Portugal
                         {nunooliveira, danieladacruz, prh}@di.uminho.pt
                                 3 Polytechnic Institute of Bragança

          Campus de Sta. Apolónia, Apartado 134 - 5301-857, Bragança, Portugal
                                           mjoao@ipb.pt



          Abstract. Many domain-specific languages, that try to bring feasible
          alternatives for existing solutions while simplifying programming work,
          have come up in recent years. Although, these little languages seem to
          be easy to use, there is an open issue whether they bring advantages in
          comparison to the application libraries, which are the most commonly
          used implementation approach. In this work, we present an experiment,
          which was carried out to compare such a domain-specific language with
          a comparable application library. The experiment was conducted with 36
          programmers, who have answered a questionnaire on both
          implementation approaches. The questionnaire is more than 100 pages
          long. For a domain-specific language and the application library, the
          same problem domain has been used – construction of graphical user
          interfaces. In terms of a domain-specific language, XAML has been used
          and C# Forms for the application library. A cognitive dimension
          framework has been used for a comparison between XAML and C#
          Forms.
          Keywords: domain-specific languages; general-purpose languages;
          program comprehension; empirical software engineering.




1.        Introduction

The primary goal in developing a new programming language is to make
programming more efficient. The perfect programming language should
provide the right level of abstraction, meaning that it describes solutions
naturally and hides unnecessary details. Also, it should be expressive enough
in the problem domain and should provide guarantees on properties that are
critical for the problem domain. It should also have precise semantics to
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

enable formal reasoning about a program. With general-purpose languages
(GPLs), this is difficult to achieve, since GPLs tend to be general, resulting in
poor support for domain-specific notation. On the other hand, domain-specific
languages (DSLs) can be designed in many problem domains to exactly have
properties mentioned above. A DSL is a language that is tailored to a specific
application domain that offers appropriate notations and abstractions [1]. For
a domain in question, DSLs are more expressive and are easier to use than
GPLs, with gains in productivity and maintenance costs [2 - 4].
   GPLs are perfectly established in the life-cycle of software development.
Their characteristics are widely spread amongst software engineers. On the
other hand, the integration of DSLs into the software development life-cycle is
not so smooth [5]. However, many DSL studies during the last ten years [1, 3,
6 – 12], reveal the importance of these languages in software engineering.
The concentration on a definition of notation that would only express concepts
of a single application domain, brings the possibility to sharpen the edges of a
language, which makes it more and more efficient in various directions, which
are briefly elaborated below. One of these directions is the efficiency of being
read and learned by the domain experts [13]. To use DSLs that allow focusing
on the problem and not on the solution, can be profitable at earlier stages of
the software life-cycle as well [14], such as requirements analysis and
management [15]. Moreover, there is the possibility of integrating domain
experts in the later stages of the software development life-cycle [2, 16].
Since the usage of GPLs requires good programming skills, the domain-
experts, who are not proficient in that area, can do very little on this matter.
However, with the use of DSLs, they can concentrate on the programming
tasks and they can even do programming. Another benefit of DSLs is that
software maintenance is simplified [2], since DSLs provide self-
documentation that avoids the search for documentation resources, which
may be unavailable in the first place. DSLs are also claimed to be a good
approach for software reuse [17]. In this context, not only the pieces of
software are reused, but also the knowledge embodied in the language.
Another facet of efficiency can be observed in the tools that give support to a
language. Their processors, for instance, can be improved to offer better
results, as the domain is restricted and the knowledge is centralized [18, 19].
All together, these aspects diminish the costs of engineering and
reengineering, and increase reliability and maintainability of the software
constructed with DSLs [20].
   Although, DSLs have proven their usefulness, GPLs together with
application libraries (APIs) are still the most commonly used programmer’s
choice when preparing new solutions for their problems. One of the reasons
that DSLs are not accepted among the practitioners is the lack of DSLs’
promotion. Further, studies that would point out the benefits of DSL over GPL
solution are rare. In this paper, we will use the cognitive dimension framework
(CDF) [21, 22, 23] to compare DSL and GPL programs and to expose




248                                ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
       Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


properties that are enhanced in the context of DSLs. The goal of the project1
is to measure how easy it is to understand programs written in DSLs
compared to GPLs. In this manner, the experiment is conducted with the use
of questionnaires to measure programmers’ understanding of DSL and GPL
programs on the same problem domain, a construction of graphical user
interfaces (GUIs). More precisely, with these questionnaires, we attempt to
confirm that DSL programs are easier to understand than GPL programs.
This hypothesis is defended with an experiment in a controlled environment,
using direct observations of the experiment evaluation model involving CDF.
   The organization of this paper is as follows. Related work on the
preparation of an experiment and CDF is discussed in Section 2. The
experiment skeleton, the identification of its main goals, and experiment
details are introduced in Section 3. The experiment results, with the cognitive
dimension framework, are given in Section 4. Concluding remarks are
summarized in Section 5.



2.       Related work

This work can be classified within the category of empirical software
engineering. Empirical research in software engineering is an important
discipline that shows practical results on how practitioners (developers, end-
users) come to accept and use technologies, techniques, etc. In order to
avoid questionable results and to have an option to repeat the research,
giving the same results, experiments must be prepared with caution. One of
the most well known frameworks for software experiments is described in
[24]. This framework concentrates on building the knowledge concerning the
context of an experiment and is based on organizing sets of related studies
(family of studies). Such studies contribute to common hypotheses, which do
not vary for individual experiments. In order to prepare this experiment we
have followed guidelines from a framework [24]. We have also defined:
context of the study, experiment hypothesis, comparison validity, and
measurement framework.
   Teaching environments give us an opportunity to conduct experiments in
computer science programs as well. However, a lot of concerns are
connected with the accuracy of results in such environments and several
threats to the validity of experiments have to be identified as well as to
interpret the results correctly. For those who are interested to read more
about this topic, a checklist for integrating empirical studies in teaching
activities can be found in the work [25].
   As stated above, an important step in the experiment preparation is to set
down the measurement framework – how the results of an experiment are
evaluated and interpreted. In cognitive theory, guidelines on how to measure


1
    This work is sponsored by bilateral project “Program Comprehension for Domain-
     Specific Languages” (code BI-PT/08-09-008) between Slovenia and Portugal.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               249
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

a human’s ability to program are defined. CDF [21] provides cognitively-
relevant aspects which can be used to determine how easy it is to understand
a program. In our study, CDF is used to compare user understanding of DSL
and GPL programs. In the past the CDF has been used to assess the
usability of visual programming languages [26, 27] and spreadsheets [28].
   Recently, another application for cognitive dimensions can be found in [29],
where a method for designing Framework-Specific Modeling Languages
(FSMLs) is presented. From FSML specifications, a user can build
applications based on object-oriented frameworks. In FSML software, artifacts
(models, languages, etc.) are evaluated according to their goals with different
quality methods. Particularly, the quality of notation is measured with
cognitive dimensions – a heuristic measure that evaluates the notation and its
environment.
   Before this experiment, the authors of the paper were involved in another
similar experiment [30]. That work is important for an interested reader, since
the information on experiment skeletons is described in great detail.
Difference between both experiments is in the hypothesis and
exclusion/inclusion of CDF. Also, the problem domain in experiment [30] is
different (graph description with DOT language [31]) than in this paper
(construction of GUI with XAML).
   This paper is also closely related to the field of Program Comprehension,
which is a hard cognitive task, done by a software analyst. In the process of
program comprehension, the use of tools to interconnect different views
(operational, behavioral, etc.) to understand the results of applications, are
indispensable. Traditional techniques on program comprehension from GPLs
(visualizers, animators, etc.) have been studied and applied to DSLs in our
previous work [32], where CDF was also briefly described and applied to
DSLs.



3.     Presentation of experiment

In this section the preparation, execution, and experiment evaluation model is
given.


3.1.   Objective of the experiment

In [3] the empirical results that compare ten diverse implementation
approaches for DSLs, conducted on the same representative language, are
provided. Among the implementation approaches, the comparison also
included the XML-based approach. From this study, it can be concluded that
XML-based approach has some disadvantages [3]. Although, XML usage and
its tool support are spreading, this is one of the reasons that XAML [33], as a
representative DSL, has been chosen for this study. XAML, the Extensible
Application Markup Language, is a language for construction of graphical




250                               ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
       Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


user interfaces in Windows Presentation Foundation and Silverlight
applications of .NET Framework 3.5. C# Forms [34] has been used for the
comparison since it covers the same domain of graphical user interfaces.


3.2.      Hypothesis of the experiment

In order to perform the comparison on XAML and C# Forms, two separate
questionnaires have been prepared. The study that was carried out had a
task to observe programmers’ efficiency on understanding programs with both
approaches, compare the results obtained through questionnaires and use
them to investigate the following hypothesis:
   H1null
   There is no significant difference in program understanding between
domain-specific or general-purpose languages, when using XAML or C#
Forms for comparison.
   H1alt
   There is a significant difference in program understanding between
domain-specific or general-purpose languages when using XAML instead of
C# Forms.
   This hypothesis is the object of investigation in the conducted experiment
and is further examined in the Section 4, where the questionnaires results are
presented.


3.3.      Preparation of experiment

The results from an experiment are reliable if the repetition of the experiment
can be proven [35]. Repetition is strongly connected to agreements set down
before the start of the experiment [24]. Therefore, some rules and constraints
were defined for the questionnaire implementers:
   – the same group of questions for both experiments on a GPL and a DSL
must be used,
   – the questions for two applications on the same question were prepared
(easier and harder application domain),
   – the equal questions in DSL and GPL questionnaires must be defined by
the same number of components in order to obtain the same level of question
complexity, and
   – the questions and the given choices (programs) must be reviewed by
other domain experts, to obtain a code as optimal as possible.
   As stated above, two questionnaires have been prepared for program
understanding of DSL and GPL programs. Then, the structure of
questionnaires has been defined to cover the following three topics of
program understanding: learn, perceive, and evolve. In the first group,
questions on learning notation and meaning of programs have been given to
the programmers. In the second group, questions on program perceiving




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               251
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

have been defined, such as identification of correct meaning from a given
program, language constructs, new construct meaning, and meaning of a
program with given comments. In the third group, programmers had been
challenged to expand/remove/replace program functionality.
   For these three groups, 11 questions have been defined:
   – Learn
   • Q1 Select syntactically correct statements.
   • Q2 Select program statements with no sense (unreasonable).
   • Q3 Select a valid program with the given result.
   – Perceive
   • Q4 Select a correct result for the given program.
   • Q5 Identify language constructs.
   • Q6 Select a program with the same result.
   • Q7 Select a correct meaning for the new language construct.
   • Q8 Identify language constructs in the program with comments.
   – Evolve
   • Q9 Expand the program with new functionality.
   • Q10 Remove functionality from the program.
   • Q11 Change functionality in the program.
   Learning and perceiving questions have been defined as a multiple-choice
question, and questions under evolve have been defined as an essay
question (programmers are challenged to modify existing code). Both, XAML
and C# Forms questionnaires have been constructed with the use of the
above questions.
   To illustrate the style of the questions, used in the questionnaires, an
example is presented in Figure 1. Because of the question size only the
correct choice is given. Complete questionnaires can be found on a project
group webpage2. The above questions (Q1-Q11) have been used as
templates to define DSL and GPL questionnaires. The first version of DSL
and GPL questionnaires has been given to a small group as a training set, in
order to receive feedback. Further, results from a training set have been
studied and used to refine the questions before applying them to the target
groups of students. Most correctness issues were related to the program
failures, question understandability and question complexity comparability
between DSL and GPL questions.


3.4.    Execution of the experiment

Besides well-structured questionnaires, other factors have also been
controlled in the experiment. The list of experiment execution actions in the
classroom (just before starting, as soon as it begins, and during the
experiment) are provided below:
   – a short tutorial, for end-users, has been given on the problem domain
(graphical user interfaces),

2 http://epl.di.uminho.pt/~ gepl/DSL/




252                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
       Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


   – a tutorial on domain specific notation (XAML), together with an example
of a program, has been given to end-users,
   – a tutorial on application library (C# Forms) together with an example of
the program has been given to end-users,
   – a tutorial has been given to end-users in their native language, however
the slides, programs and experiment questionnaires were in English, and
   – the slides and the examples have been given to end-users and could be
used during the experiment.
   If necessary, individual help to better understand the questions was
provided to the programmers.


3.5.      Processing the results

There were also issues that needed to be controlled, after the programmers
completed the questionnaire. One of those is submission completeness.
When students submitted their questionnaires, it was checked if the
questionnaire contained answers to all questions. Most of the programmers
answered the questions, however if some answers were missing, the
programmers were advised to complete the questionnaire. Still, if some
answers were found missing during the processing of the results, the
complete programmer questionnaire was eliminated from the further
experiment analysis. For previously mentioned reasons, one submission has
been eliminated from the results.


3.6.      Threats to validity

In each experiment, there are several threats to the validity of results. Those
threats need to be identified and handled before the start of the experiment.
To restrict the impact of the experiment environment on the results, the
following issues have been identified for our study.

   Chosen domain Results of the experiment are strongly connected to
programmers’ experiences and knowledge of the chosen problem domain. In
Table 1, programmers’ familiarity with the construction of the GUI is
presented, together with the experience on XAML and C# Forms library
application. From Table 1, we can conclude that programmers are
experienced in the construction GUIs domain. However, their experience in
implementation technique differs – programmers were unfamiliar with XAML
on one hand (median value 1), and had good knowledge in constructing GUIs
with C# Forms (median value 4) on the other. Uneven knowledge on both
notations could have made an influence on comparison results.

  Programmers’ experience In Table 2, results from the self evaluation test
are presented, where students (second year of undergraduate computer




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               253
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

science) grade their general knowledge on programming, programming in C#
language and prior experience with DSLs. Comparing knowledge on C#
(median value 4) and prior experience with DSLs (median value 2) could have
also made an influence on experiment results.


Table 1. Programmers’ knowledge in construction of graphical user interfaces
(N = 36)

                                                      Average3 Median St. dev.
     Familiarity GUI domain                             3.39     4       1.18
     Knowledge of XAML                                  1.36     1       0.68
     Knowledge of C# Forms application library          3.5      4       1.11

Table 2. Programmers experiences in programming (N = 36)

                                            Average      Median St. dev.
            Skills in programming             3.41         3.5     0.65
            Skills of programming in          3.53         4       0.74
            C#
            Prior experience with DSLs         2.28        2         0.70

   Comparability of questionnaires The same type of questions in DSL and
GPL questionnaires contain a similar number of graphical components
(labels, text fields, buttons, etc), to obtain the same level of complexity.
   Order of questionnaires An experiment on program understanding was
carried out twice, at different times and on different students. The first group
started the experiment with the questionnaire on DSL and proceeded with a
GPL questionnaire. The second group started the questionnaire on GPL and
finished with the DSL questionnaire. In such a way, the influence of starting
the experiment on the same questionnaire with all subjects was avoided and
with such, the order of questionnaires is not relevant for the outcome of the
study.



4.       Results

All together, programmers answered 22 questions on both questionnaires.
Success rate for questions varied from 27.14% for Q6 to 79.73% for Q9
(Table 3). Differences in success rate in the same language (DSL/GPL) can
be explained with different difficulty level (some questions were harder than

3
    A five-grade scale, starting from very bad (1) to very good (5) was used for self-
    evaluation questionnaires (in Tables 1 and 2). Note, that column “Average” shows
    the average value given by 36 programmers, “Median” stands for middle value in set
    of programmers grades and “St. dev.” represents standard deviation on given
    grades.




254                                    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study




Fig. 1. Question 5 in DSL and GPL questionnaires with the correct choice




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                            255
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

others). On the other hand the biggest difference between GPL and DSL is 51.16% in
the case of Q9. The smallest difference is found in Q2, where the difference is just
3.44%. In this case, the success rate was even slightly better for GPL than DSL. In our
opinion, this is due to the difficultness of Q2 (success rate was less than 39%), where
syntactically correct programs with no sense have to be identified. Since programmers
have more experience in C# Forms than XAML (Table 1), they were more successful
with GPL than DSL, in finding programs with no sense.

Table 3. Average programmer success rate (N = 35)

                 Question      DSL         GPL          Difference
                               XAML        C# Forms
                 Q1            72.97%      48.57%       24.4%
                 Q2            35.14%      38.57%       -3.44%
                 Q3            64.86%      35.71%       29.15%
                 Q4            77.03%      70.00%       7.03%
                 Q5            64.86%      48.57%       16.29%
                 Q6            39.19%      27.14%       12.05%
                 Q7            75.68%      62.86%       12.82%
                 Q8            62.16%      45.71%       16.45%
                 Q9            79.73%      28.57%       51.16%
                 Q10           68.92%      41.43%       27.49%
                 Q11           66.22%      30.00%       36.22%

Table 4. Average programmer success rate on learn, perceive and evolve (N=35)

                          DSL                            GPL
                          XAML                           C# Forms
           Question
                                    Std.       Std. err.         Std.         Std. err.
                          Mean                           Mean
                                    dev.       mean              dev.         mean
         Q1, Q2, and
Learn                57.62% 21.90% 3.70%                 40.95% 22.99% 3.89%
         Q3
         Q4, Q5, Q6,
Perceive             64.57% 19.45% 3.29%                 50.86% 18.69% 3.16%
         Q7, and Q8
         Q9, Q10,
Evolve               70.95% 20.35% 3.44%                 33.33% 26.20% 4.43%
         and Q11
         All
Total                64.34% 14.81% 2.50%                 43.37% 15.99% 2.70%
         questions

   However, drawing conclusions based on an average value of a single
question can be extremely risky. Therefore, by grouping questions into learn,
perceive and evolve categories, we can obtain more reliable results. In Table
4, the success rate on questions by the individual group is presented with a
mean value, standard deviation, and standard error mean. Table 4 confirms
our presumption that program understanding, in terms of learn, perceive and
evolve, is much better for DSL programs than for GPL programs. Later
observation is especially obvious from the results on evolve questions – the
mean value of the success rate was 37.62% better for DSL than on GPL




256                                   ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


questions (see mean values in Table 4). Similar results were also obtained on
the other problem domain described in [30]. To support the results in Table 3
and Table 4, statistical tests have been performed to evaluate whether the
comparison shows the statistical significant difference. Efficiency on both
questionnaires (see last row from Table 4) has been compared for all
programmers. The results from questionnaires were statistically tested with t-
test, since the means of two independent groups were compared. The
threshold for the independent t-test was set to D = 0.05 and the test results
are shown in Table 5. The most important column in the table is the
significance

Table 5. Independent t-test for program understanding (N = 35)

                                                                95% Confidence
                    Sig.                    Std.      Std. err. Interval       of
            t                    Mean
                    (two-tailed)            dev.      mean      the Difference
                                                                Lower     Upper
XAML
vs.      5.474 0.000              20.971 22.664       3.831      13.186   28.757
C# Forms

column. Observing this data confirms that the difference in mean value
between XAML and C# Forms program understanding was significant, since
a significant level was not reached. With observations from Table 5, we could
reject null hypothesis H1null since subjects did better on XAML program
understanding and accept the alternative hypothesis: (H1alt): there is a
significant difference in program understanding between domain-specific or
general-purpose languages when using XAML instead of C# Forms.
   While this experiment indeed shows superiority of DSLs on an end-user
ability to learn, perceive and evolve programs in this particular domain, it does
not provide possible explanations why DSLs programs are easier to
understand. The “psychology of programming” [36, 37] is a research field
which tries to identify, understand and explain those cognitive processes
which take place during reasoning (e.g., programming, program
understanding). In this context, CDF [21] provides useful dimensions, which
help us to better explain why DSL programs are easier to understand than
GPL programs. The CDF has been used before to assess the usability of
visual programming languages [26], while no such study exists for DSLs.
These cognitive dimensions are:
   – Closeness of mapping – languages should be task-specific;
   – Viscosity – revisions should be painless;
   – Hidden dependencies – the consequences of changes should be clear;
   – Hard mental operations – no enigmatic is allowed;
   – Imposed guess-ahead – no premature commitment;
   – Secondary notation – allow to encompass additional information;
   – Visibility – search trails should be short;
   – Consistency – user expectations should not be broken;




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                              257
 Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
 ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

    – Diffuseness – language should not be too verbose;
    – Error-proneness – notation should catch mistakes avoiding errors;
    – Progressive evaluation – get immediate feedback;
    – Role expressiveness – see the relations among components clearly;
    – Abstraction gradient – languages should allow different abstraction
 levels.
    The next step was to connect cognitive dimensions with our questions. We
 identified which dimensions are relevant for a particular question (Table 6). As
 it can be seen Di (dimension i of CDF) can be related to several questions
 used in our questionnaires.

 Table 6. Questions connection to cognitive dimensions

                          Q1   Q2    Q3   Q4   Q5   Q6    Q7   Q8   Q9   Q10     Q11
Closeness of mapping      1    1     1    1    1    1     1    1    1    1       1
Viscosity                 0    0     0    0    0    0     0    0    1    1       1
Hidden dependencies       0    0     1    1    1    1     0    1    0    1       0
Hard mental operations    0    1     1    1    1    1     1    1    0    0       0
Imposed guess-ahead       0    0     0    0    0    0     0    0    1    0       1
Secondary notation        0    0     0    0    0    0     0    1    0    0       0
Visibility                0    0     1    1    1    1     1    1    0    0       0
Consistency               0    0     0    0    0    1     1    0    0    0       0
Diffuseness               1    1     1    1    1    1     1    1    1    1       1
Error-proneness           1    1     1    1    1    1     1    1    1    1       1
Progressive evaluation    0    0     0    0    0    0     0    0    0    0       0
Role expressiveness       0    1     1    1    1    1     1    1    1    1       1
Abstraction gradient      0    0     1    1    1    1     1    1    0    0       0

   Questions have been designed in such a way that they directly reflect
 cognitive dimensions as much as possible. However, not all cognitive
 dimensions play an important role in all questions. Hence, to evaluate a single
 cognitive dimension (Di) we proposed the following formula:
          11         Sj
    Di    ¦Q * Cij
          j 1         j
 where Qij stands for the value from Table 6, which means whether dimension
 Di is connected to the question Qj. Variable Sj represents an average
 programmer’s success rate on question Qj (Table 3). For example, if 4
 programmers out of 5 answered question Q1 correctly, the value of S1 would
 be 0.8. Finally, Cj represents the number of cognitive dimensions relevant for
 Qj (for example, C1 = 3). This formula is used for XAML as well as for C#
 Forms. Intuitively, it means that cognitive dimensions contribute to the
 success of a particular question. Here, we assume that contribution of
 involved cognitive dimensions was equally distributed (one cognitive
 dimension is not more important than the other, if it is involved). Moreover, we
 assume that the higher values always mean a positive influence of particular
 cognitive dimension. For example, higher values for ’closeness of mapping’




 258                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


mean that the semantic gap between the problem and the solution space is
small, or higher values for ’hidden dependencies’ mean that short and long-
range interactions among program components are immediately visible.
   Table 7 roughly shows how a particular cognitive dimension contributes to
the questionnaires’ success for XAML, as well as for C# Forms. From Table 7
it can be seen that in our experiment, the most influential for DSL/GPL
program understanding were: closeness of mappings, diffuseness, error-
proneness, role expressiveness, and hard mental operations. More than
particular values, the difference among cognitive dimensions for XAML and
C# Forms is far more important. The biggest difference among cognitive
dimensions was in closeness of mappings, diffuseness, error-proneness, role
expressiveness, and viscosity.

Table 7. Influence of cognitive dimension to XAML and C# Forms

                                 DSL          GPL           Difference
                                 XAML         C# Forms
          Closeness of mapping 1.127          0.749         0.377
          Viscosity              0.442        0.237         0.206
          Hidden dependencies 0.486           0.343         0.143
          Hard mental operations 0.525        0.421         0.105
          Imposed guess-ahead 0.243           0.098         0.146
          Secondary notation     0.069        0.051         0.018
          Visibility             0.455        0.344         0.111
          Consistency            0.128        0.100         0.028
          Diffuseness            1.127        0.749         0.377
          Error-proneness        1.127        0.749         0.377
          Progressive evaluation N/A          N/A           N/A
          Role expressiveness    0.884        0.587         0.296
          Abstraction gradient   0.455        0.344         0.111

   Closeness of mapping refers to the width of the semantic gap between the
problem and the solution spaces. Diffuseness refers to the number of
symbols needed to express the meaning. By definition, DSLs use existing
domain notation, which should be at an appropriate level of verbosity, so it is
expected that they exhibit low diffuseness. On the other hand, it was shown in
[38] that plenty of low-level primitives, which are often purely syntactical, are
one of the biggest cognitive barriers for end-user programmers. Error
proneness refers to the capability of a language to induce careless mistakes.
GPLs, due to their extension and intrinsic complexity, are usually error-prone,
while DSLs, due to the narrow domain they are designed for, are usually less
error prone. Role expressiveness refers to the ability to see how each
component of a program relates to the whole. The high role expressiveness
can be more easily achieved in DSLs due to domain specifics and shorter
programs. It is shown in our experiment that differences in closeness of
mapping, diffuseness, error proneness, and role expressiveness among




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                              259
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

XAML and C# Forms are the biggest and the source of main contribution for
easier understanding of XAML programs than programs written in C# Forms.
  Viscosity refers to the amount of effort that is needed to perform small
changes. Since DSLs are usually at a high abstraction level and have natural
notation, small changes should be easier to perform. It is shown in our
experiment that the difference in viscosity between XAML and C# Forms was
among the largest. Viscosity was involved only in questions Q9-Q11, which
were much better solved with the use of XAML than using C# Forms. We can
conclude that viscosity had an important influence on this success.



5.      Conclusion and future work

The purpose of this paper is to promote formal studies on the advantages of
DSLs over GPLs. In this paper we have tried to explain the difference
between DSL/GPL program understanding, using the cognitive dimension
framework. Questionnaires on understanding programs have been prepared
and given to the programmers. Each programmer answered a 100 page long
questionnaires and on an average spent more than 3 hours solving 44
questions.
   Results show that programmers’ success rate was around 15% better for
DSL in all three groups of questions: learn, perceive and evolve, despite the
fact that programmers were significantly less experienced in XAML than C#
Forms. Further, the experiment measurement framework included cognitive
dimensions to identify the aspects among these dimensions that are
enhanced in the context of DSL. It can be learned from the study that DSLs
are superior to GPLs in all cognitive dimensions. The cognitive dimensions,
with the biggest influence in the experiment, are closeness of mappings,
diffuseness, error-proneness, role expressiveness, and viscosity.
   We consider that the results of this experiment are reliable despite the fact
that the experiment has been done only on a single domain. One of the future
tasks of this project is to conduct similar experiments in different domains.



References

1.    Mernik, M., Heering, J., Sloane, A.M.: When and how to develop domain-specific
      languages. ACM Computing Surveys. 37(4) (December 2005) 316–344
2.    Deursen, A.v., Klint, P.: Little languages: Little maintenance? Journal of Software
      Maintenance 10 (1998) 75–92
3.    Kosar, T., Martínez López, P.E., Barrientos, P.A., Mernik, M.: A preliminary study
      on various implementation approaches of domain-specific language. Information
      and Software Technology 50(5) (2008) 390–405
4.    Živanov, v., Rakiü, P., Hajdukoviü, M.: Using code generation approach in
      developing kiosk applications. Journal on Computer Science and Information
      Systems 5(1) (2008) 41–59




260                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


5.  Sprinkle, J., Mernik, M., Tolvanen, J-P., Spinellis, D.: What Kinds of Nails Need a
    Domain-Specific Hammer? IEEE Software, 26(4) (2009) 15–18
6. Wile, D.S.: Supporting the DSL spectrum. Journal of Computing and Information
    Technology 9(4) (2001) 263–287
7. van Deursen, A., Klint, P., Visser, J.: Domain-specific languages: an annotated
    bibliography. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 35 (2000) 26–36
8. Hudak, P.: Building domain-specific embedded languages. ACM Computing
    Surveys 28(4) (June 1996) 196–202
9. Hudak, P.: Modular domain specific languages and tools. In: ICSR ’98:
    Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Software Reuse, Washington,
    DC, USA, IEEE Computer Society (1998)
10. Kieburtz, R.B., Mckinney, L., Bell, J.M., Hook, J., Kotov, A., Lewis, J., Oliva, D.P.,
    Sheard, T., Smith, I., Walton, L.: A software engineering experiment in software
    component generation. In: ICSE ’96: Proceedings of the 18th international
    conference on Software engineering, Washington, DC, USA, IEEE Computer
    Society (1996) 542–552
11. Sirer, E.G., Bershad, B.N.: Using production grammars in software testing. In:
    Proceedings of the 2nd conference on Domain-specific languages, New York, NY,
    USA, ACM (1999) 1–13
12. Kolovos, D.S., Paige, R.F., Kelly, T., Polack, F.A.C.: Requirements for domain-
    specific languages. In: Proc. 1st ECOOP Workshop on Domain-Specific Program
    Development (DSPD 2006), Nantes, France (July 2006)
13. Consel, C., Latry, F., Réveillère, L., Cointe, P.: A generative programming
    approach to developing DSL compilers. In Gluck, R., Lowry, M., eds.: Fourth
    International Conference on Generative Programming and Component
    Engineering (GPCE). Volume 3676 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Tallinn,
    Estonia, Springer-Verlag (September 2005) 29–46
14. Jackson, M.: Problem frames and software engineering. Information and Software
    Technology 47(14) (November 2005) 903–912
15. Aurum, A., Wohlin, C.: Engineering and Managing Software Requirements.
    Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA (2005)
16. Gray, J., Fisher, K., Consel, C., Karsai, G., Mernik, M., Tolvanen, J.P.: DSLs: the
    good, the bad, and the ugly. In: OOPSLA Companion ’08: Companion to the 23rd
    ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented programming systems languages
    and applications, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2008) 791–794
17. Krueger, C.W.: Software reuse. ACM Computing Surveys 24(2) (June 1992) 131–
    183
18. Javed, F., Mernik, M., Bryant, B., Sprague, A.: An unsupervised incremental
    learning algorithm for domain-specific language development. Applied Artificial
    Intelligence 22(7) (2008) 707-729
19. Wu, H., Gray, J., Mernik, M.: Grammar-driven generation of domain-specific
    language debuggers. Software Practice and Experience 38(10) (2008) 1073-1103
20. Herndon, R.M., Berzins, V.A.: The realizable benefits of a language prototyping
    language. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 14(6) (1988) 803–809
21. Green, T., Petre, M.: Usability analysis of visual programming environments: a
    ”cognitive dimensions” framework. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing
    7(2) (1996) 131–174
22. Blackwell, A., Britton, C., Cox, A., Green, T.R.G., Gurr, C., Kadoda, G., Kutar, M.,
    Loomes, M., Nehaniv, C., Petre, M., Roast, C., Roe, C., Wong, A., Young, R.:
    Cognitive dimensions of notations: Design tools for cognitive technology. In:
    Cognitive Technology: Instruments of Mind. Springer-Verlag (2001) 325–341




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                       261
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

23. Green, T.R.G., Blandford, A.E., Church, L., Roast, C.R., Clarke, S.: Cognitive
    dimensions: achievements, new directions, and open questions. Journal of Visual
    Languages & Computing 17(4) (August 2006) 328–365
24. Basili, V., Shull, F., Lanubile, F.: Building knowledge through families of
    experiments. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 25(4) (1999) 456–473
25. Carver, J., Jaccheri, L., Morasca. S., Shull. F.: A checklist for integrating student
    empirical studies with research and teaching goals. Empirical Software
    Engineering 15(1) 2010 35-59
26. Blackwell, A.: Ten years of cognitive dimensions in visual languages and
    computing: Guest editor’s introduction to special issue. Journal of Visual
    Languages and Computing 17(4) (2006) 285–287
27. Yang, S., Burnett, M., DeKoven, E., Zloof, M.: Representation design benchmarks:
    a design-time aid for VPL navigable static representations. Journal of Visual
    Languages and Computing 8(5/6) (1997) 563–599
28. Peyton Jones, S., Blackwell, A., Burnett, M.: A user-centred approach to functions
    in excel. In: Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGPLAN international conference on
    Functional programming. (2003) 165–176
29. Antkiewicz, M., Czarnecki, K., Stephan, M.: Engineering of framework-specific
    modeling languages. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 35 (6) (2009)
    795–824
30. Kosar, T., Mernik, M., ýrepinšek, M., Henriques, P.R., Cruz, D.d., Varanda
    Pereira, M.J., Oliveira, N.: Influence of domain-specific notation to program
    understanding. In: Proceedings of 2nd IMCSIT Workshop on Advances in
    Programming Languages (WAPL’09), Mrągowo, Poland (October 2009) 675 – 682
31. Dot: Graph description language, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DOT
    language
32. Varanda Pereira, M.J., Mernik, M., Cruz, D.d., Henriques, P.R.: Program
    comprehension for domain-specific languages. Journal on Computer Science and
    Information Systems 5(2) (2008) 1–17
33. XAML:       Extensible     application    markup      language,       available    at:
    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extensible Application Markup Language
34. C# Forms, available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows Forms
35. Shull, F., Carver, J., Vegas, S., Juristo, N.: The role of replications in empirical
    software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 13(2) (2008) 211–218
36. Weinberg, G.M.: The Psychology of Computer Programming. Van Nostrand
    Reinhold (1971)
37. A. Blackwell. Psychological issues in end-user programming. In H. Lieberman, F.
    Paterno, and V. Wulf, editors, End User Development Springer (2006) 9–30
38. Lewis, C., Olson, G.: Can principles of cognition lower the barriers to
    programming? In: 2nd workshop on Empirical Studies of Programmers. (1987) 248
    – 263




Tomaž Kosar received the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the
University of Maribor, Slovenia in 2007. His research is mainly concerned with
design and implementation of domain-specific languages. Other research
interest in computer science include also domain-specific visual languages,
empirical software engineering, software security, generative programming,
compiler construction, object oriented programming, object-oriented design,
refactoring, and unit testing. He is currently a teaching assistant at the




262                                    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    Comparing General-Purpose and Domain-Specific Languages: An Empirical Study


University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science.

Nuno Oliveira received, from University of Minho, a B.Sc. in Computer
Science (2007) and a M.Sc. in Informatics (2009). He is a member of the
Language Processing group at CCTC (Computer Science and Technology
Center) , University of Minho. He participated in several projects with focus on
Visual Languages and Program Comprehension; VisualLISA and Alma2 the
main outcome of his master thesis entitled "Program Comprehension Tools
for Domain-Specific Languages", are the most relevant works. The latter
came under "Program Comprehension for Domain-Specific Languages", a
bilateral project between Portugal and Slovenia, funded by FCT. Currently, he
is starting his PhD studies on Patterns for Architectures Coordination Analysis
and Self-Adaptive Architectures, under MathIS, a research project also
funded by FCT. Meanwhile he is an assistant-lecturer (practical classes) in a
course on Imperative Programming, at University of Minho.

Marjan Mernik received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science
from the University of Maribor in 1994 and 1998 respectively. He is currently a
professor at the University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science. He is also an adjunct professor at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Computer and Information Sciences.
His research interests include programming languages, compilers, grammar-
based systems, grammatical inference, and evolutionary computations. He is
a member of the IEEE, ACM and EAPLS.

Maria João Varanda Pereira received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in
computer science from the University of Minho in 1996 and 2003 respectively.
She is a member of the Language Processing group in the Computer Science
and Technology Center, at the University of Minho. She is currently an
adjunct professor at the Technology and Management School of the
Polytechnic Institute of Bragança, on the Informatics and Communications
Department and vice-president of the same school. She usually teaches
courses under the broader area of programming: programming languages,
algorithms and language processing. But also some courses about project
management. As a researcher of gEPL, she is working with the development
of compilers based on attribute grammars, automatic generation tools, visual
languages and program understanding. She was also responsible for PCVIA
project (Program Comprehension by Visual Inspection and Animation), a FCT
funded national research project; She was involved in several bilateral
cooperation projects with University of Maribor (Slovenia) since 2000. The
last one was about the subject ''Program Comprehension for Domain Specific
Languages''.

Matej ýrepinšek received the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the
University of Maribor, Slovenia in 2007. His research interests include
grammatical    inference,  evolutionary  computations,   object-oriented




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                             263
Tomaž Kosar, Nuno Oliveira, Marjan Mernik, Maria João Varanda Pereira, Matej
ýrepinšek, Daniela da Cruz, and Pedro Rangel Henriques

programming, compilers and grammar-based systems. He is currently a
teaching assistant at the University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science.

Daniela da Cruz received a degree in “Mathematics and Computer Science”,
at University of Minho (UM), and now she is a Ph.D. student of ”Computer
Science” also at University of Minho, under the MAPi doctoral program. She
joined the research and teaching team of “gEPL, the Language Processing
group” in 2005. She is teaching assistant in different courses in the area of
Compilers and Formal Development of Language Processors; and
Programming Languages and Paradigms (Procedural, Logic, and OO). As a
researcher of gEPL, Daniela is working with the development of compilers
based on attribute grammars and automatic generation tools. She developed
a completed compiler and a virtual machine for the LISS language (Language
of Integers, Sequences and Sets - an imperative and powerful programming
language conceived at UM). She was also involved in the PCVIA (Program
Comprehension by Visual Inspection and Animation), a FCT funded national
research project; in that context, Daniela worked in the implementation of
“Alma”, a program visualizer and animator tool for program understanding.
Now she is working in the intersection of formal verification (design by
contract) and code analysis techniques, mainly slicing.

Pedro Rangel Henriques got a degree in "Electrotechnical/Electronics
Engineering", at FEUP (Porto University), and finished a Ph.D. thesis in
"Formal Languages and Attribute Grammars" at University of Minho. In 1981
he joined the Computer Science Department of University of Minho, where he
is a teacher/researcher. Since 1995 he is the coordinator of the "Language
Processing group" at CCTC (Computer Science and Technologies Center).
He teaches many different courses under the broader area of programming:
Programming Languages and Paradigms; Compilers, Grammar Engineering
and Software Analysis and Transformation; etc. Pedro Rangel Henriques has
supervised Ph.D. (11), and M.Sc. (13) thesis, and more than 50 graduating
trainingships/projects, in the areas of: language processing (textual and
visual), and structured document processing; code analysis, program
visualization/animation and program comprehension; knowledge discovery
from databases, data-mining, and data-cleaning. He is co-author of the "XML
& XSL: da teoria a prática" book, publish by FCA in 2002; and has published
3 chapters in books, and 20 journal papers.


Received: November 15, 2009; Accepted: February 24, 2010.




264                               ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
UDC 004.439, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002265O


      VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop
                  Attribute Grammars

     Nuno Oliveira1 , Maria João Varanda Pereira2 , Pedro Rangel Henriques1 ,
                      Daniela da Cruz1 , and Bastian Cramer3
               1
                University of Minho - Department of Computer Science,
                  Campus de Gualtar, 4715-057, Braga, Portugal
            {nunooliveira,prh,danieladacruz}@di.uminho.pt
                         2
                            Polytechnic Institute of Bragança
        Campus de Sta. Apolónia, Apartado 134 - 5301-857, Bragança, Portugal
                                   mjoao@ipb.pt
               3
                 University of Paderborn - Department of Informatics
                   Fürstenallee 11, 33102, Paderborn, Germany
                                  bcramer@upb.de



        Abstract. The focus of this paper is on crafting a new visual language for
        attribute grammars (AGs), and on the development of the associated pro-
        gramming environment. We present a solution for rapid development of
        VisualLISA editor using DEViL. DEViL uses traditional attribute gram-
        mars, to specify the language’s syntax and semantics, extended by vi-
        sual representations to be associated with grammar symbols. From these
        speciﬁcations a visual programming environment is automatically gener-
        ated. In our case, the environment allows us to edit a visual description
        of an AG that is automatically translated into textual notations, including
        an XML-based representation for attribute grammars (X AGra), and is in-
        tended to be helpful for beginners and rapid development of small AGs.
        X AGra allows us to use VisualLISA with other compiler-compiler tools.
        Keywords: Attribute Grammar, Visual Languages, XML Dialect, DEViL,
        VisualLISA, XAGra.


1.    Introduction
An AG can be formally deﬁned as the following tuple: AG = (G, A, R, C), where
G is a context-free grammar, A is the set of attributes, R is the set of eval-
uation rules, and C is the set of contextual conditions. Each attribute has a
type, and represents a speciﬁc property of a symbol X; we write X.a to in-
dicate that attribute a is an element of the set of attributes of X, denoted by
A(X). For each X (terminal or non-terminal), A(X) is divided into two disjoint
sets: the inherited and the synthesized attributes. Each R is a set of formulas,
like X.a = f unc(..., Y.b, ...), that deﬁne how to compute, in the precise con-
text of a production, the value of each attribute. Each C is a set of predicates,
pred(..., X.a, ...), describing the requirements that must be satisﬁed in the pre-
cise context of a production.
Nuno Oliveira et al.


    As can be deduced from this complex deﬁnition of AGs they are not as easy
to specify as people would desire because there is a gap between the problem
solution (the desired output) and the source language that must be interpreted.
The user must take care on choosing the appropriate attributes and their eval-
uation rules. Since the beginning, the literature related with compilers presents
AGs using syntax trees decorated with attributes. So it is usual to sketch up
on paper trees with attributes representing an AG. This strategy allows the de-
velopers to imagine a global solution of the problem (in a higher abstraction
level) and to detect complex dependencies between attributes, symbols and
functions, avoiding spending time with syntax details. However, such informal
drawings require the designer to translate them manually into the input notation
of a compiler generator. The person who drew it must go through the translation
of the pencil strokes into the concrete syntax of the compiler generator. These
inconveniences make the developers avoid the usage of AGs and go through
non systematic ways to implement the languages and supporting tools. So, in
this paper, we develop a Visual Language (VL), as a meta-language to write
AGs, based on a previous conceptualization that we have proposed in [1]. The
idea of this VL is not only about having a nice visual depiction and then to trans-
late it into a target notation, but also about syntactic and semantic consistency
checks.
    VLs and consequently the Visual Programming Languages (VPLs) aim at
offering the possibility to solve complex problems by describing their properties
or their behavior through graphical/iconic deﬁnitions [2]. Icons are used to be
composed in a space with two or more dimensions, deﬁning sentences that are
formally accepted by parsers, where shape, color and relative position of the
icons are relevant issues. A visual programming language implies the existence
of a Visual Programming Environment (VPE) [3, 4], because its absence makes
the language useless. Commonly, a visual programming environment consists
of an editor, enriched by several tools to analyze, to process and to transform
the drawings.
    The main idea of this work is the development of a VPE, named VisualLISA,
that assures the possibility of specifying AGs visually, and to translate them
into plain text speciﬁcations or, alternatively, into a universal XML representa-
tion designed to support generic AG speciﬁcations. The original objective of this
environment is to be used as front-end for LISA [5] system, diminishing the dif-
ﬁculties regarding the speciﬁcation of AGs in LISA. However, the generality of
the environment enables its use with systems other than LISA.
    The visual programming environment is automatically generated by DEViL,
our choice among many other tools studied; so, in this paper, the system is
introduced and its use explained. However, our objective in this paper is not
concerned with the discussion of compiler development tools, but show the be-
ﬁts of using an effective one.
    In section 2, related work is presented. In Section 3 and 4, VisualLISA lan-
guage and editor are informally described. In Section 5 the language is formally
speciﬁed, deﬁning syntactic rules, semantic constraints and a valid translation




266                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                     VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


scheme for both LISA (the ﬁrst target), and X AGra notations. In Section 6, the
DEViL generator framework, used for the automatic generation of the visual
editor, will be presented. In Section 7, following the informal conception and its
formalization, using DEViL, the visual language and the editor implementation
is shown. An overview on how to use the editor to describe an AG, is given in
Section 8.
    In Section 9, X AGra dialect is formally presented. Its main idea is to gen-
eralize the output of AG editing tools; instead of generating a description for
a speciﬁc compiler generator, the editor under development can produce this
general purpose dialect. Then to use this editor as a Front End (FE) for a spe-
ciﬁc generator, it is only necessary to resort to a simple translator to convert the
XML description into the speciﬁc notation of that CG. This approach raises the
usefulness of the editor, as it can be used as a FE for a larger range of grammar-
based generators. However, as its applicability does not end here, we introduce,
in Appendix A, X AGraAl, a tool that, based on X AGra speciﬁcations, performs
grammar analysis and transformations.
    The paper is concluded in Section 10.


2.   Related Work

Despite of existing many other applications for AGs, they are commonly as-
sociated with the development of computer languages and related tools like
parsers, translators, compilers, and others. In this context, the language engi-
neers, started to develop tools to systematize and automatize the process of
deﬁning AGs. So, several works on this area may be cited.
    LISA [5, 6] is a compiler generator based on attribute grammars, developed
at University of Maribor at Slovenia. Its main objective is to generate a compiler
for a language. The compiler is created by the speciﬁcation of a textual attribute
grammar. It automatically generates graphical and visualization tools [7] to in-
spect the written grammar, but it always need a textual speciﬁcation of the AG.
    In the same way, AnTLR [8], a powerful compiler generator, requires textual
speciﬁcations for the language grammar. This system provides online visualiza-
tion of the grammar productions but it does not provide any visualization about
the attributes neither the semantic rules of each production.
    Other similar compiler generators like UltraGram [9] or ProGrammar [10]
also produce graphical tools to ease the understanding of the grammar. But still,
the input for these compiler generators is always a text-based speciﬁcation.
    The same happens in the visual languages generation area. DEViL [11],
a generator of visual programming languages and editors, takes advantage of
AGs to deﬁne these visual outcomes. But, despite of providing excellent and
usable results, the engineer needs to grasp a whole new syntax to deﬁne the
AG used to produce the visual language.
    In [12], Ikezoe et al. present a systematic debugger for attribute grammars
integrated in a visual tool, and it provides visualizations of the grammar showing
the dependency between the symbols and the attributes. Although this is a




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                 267
Nuno Oliveira et al.


useful tool, it is only used after constructing the AG, not being a good help to
map the mental construction of an AG into its speciﬁcations.
   There are, indeed, several tools to support the speciﬁcation and develop-
ment of AGs and their associated tools, however, and according to our knowl-
edge, acquired through years of research work on the area, there are no tools
that allow the speciﬁcation of AGs using a visual notation.


3. VisualLISA - A Domain Speciﬁc Visual Language

For many years we have been thinking about and working with AGs. Inevitably
we created an abstract mental representation of how it can be regarded and
then sketched, for an easier comprehension and use. So we decided to im-
plement a framework that follows that representation. The conception of that
framework is described in this section.


3.1.   The Language Conception

VisualLISA, as a new Domain Speciﬁc Visual Language (DSVL) for attribute
grammar speciﬁcation, shall have an attractive and comprehensible layout, be-
sides the easiness of specifying the grammar model.
    We think that a desirable way to draw an AG is to make it production ori-
ented, and from there design each production as a tree. The Right-Hand Side
(RHS) symbols should be connected, by means of a visible line, to the Left-
Hand Side (LHS) symbol. The attributes should be connected to the respective
symbols, using a connection line different from the one referred before, as both
have different purposes (see Figure 6). The rules to compute the values of
each attribute should exhibit the shape of a function with its arguments (input
attributes) and its results (the output attributes). Two kinds of functions should
be represented: the identity function (when we just want to copy values) or a
generic function (for other kind of computations). Often a production has a con-
siderable number of attributes and nontrivial computations. Therefore we think
that for visualization purposes, the layout of each production should work as
a reusable template to draw several computation rules. Hence, the rules are
drawn separated from each other, but associated to a production.
    All these features can be seen in the following example, which gives a big
picture of how things get easier when dealing with the visual notation on a
real language. For this illustration we resort to LISS [13], which is a program-
ming language allowing the operation with atomic or structured integers values.
Moreover, it is fully speciﬁed using an AG, from where two semantic productions
are shown in Listing 1. For illustration purposes, some semantic rules from the
actual productions were dismissed.
    Figure 3.1 shows the visual speciﬁcation of production P1, taking advantage
of the production layout reuse feature, for rapid development and clarity. This
means that the user doesn’t have to draw the production each time he needs to
specify the computation of another attribute.




268                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                  VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars



     Listing 1. One Production form LISS
 1   P1 : Expr → Expr RelOp SingExp {
 2      (...)
 3     Expr [ 1 ] . inRow = Expr [ 0 ] . inRow ;
 4     Expr [ 1 ] . i n C o l = Expr [ 0 ] . i n C o l ;
 5     SingExp . inRow = Expr [ 0 ] . inRow ;
 6      (..)
 7     Expr [ 0 ] . o u t = Expr [ 1 ] . o u t + RelOp . o u t + SingExp . o u t ;
 8   }
 9
10   P2 : SingExp → Term {
11       SingExp . o u t = Term . o u t ;
12        (...)
13   }




                                                                                     (b)
                              (a)


     Fig. 1. LISS production on VisualLISA, with associated semantic rules




        This way, Figure 3.1 (a) we copy the values from the inherited attributes of
     the LHS symbol to the symbols at RHS; and on another computation associated
     with the same production (c.f. Figure 3.1 (b)), we assign a value to the LHS’s
     out attribute using a function and the values of other attributes implied in the
     production.


     4.     VisualLISA: The Environment

     VisualLISA editor should be compliant with the idea of offering a nice and non
     error-prone way of sketching the AG, as a ﬁrst step; and an easy translation of
     the model into a target language, as a second step. So, three main features are
     highlighted: (i) syntax validation, (ii) semantics veriﬁcation and (iii) code gen-
     eration. The syntax validation restricts some spatial combinations among the
     icons of the language. In order to avoid syntactic mistakes, the edition should be




     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                        269
Nuno Oliveira et al.


syntax-directed. The semantics veriﬁcation copes with the static and dynamic
semantics of the language. Finally, the code generation feature generates code
from the drawings sketched up. The target code would be LISAsl or X AGra.
LISAsl speciﬁcation generated is intended to be passed to LISA system in
a straightforward step. X AGra speciﬁcation generated is intended to give the
system more versatility and further usage perspectives.


5.       Speciﬁcation of VisualLISA
The speciﬁcation of VisualLISA bases on three main issues: i) the deﬁnition
of the underlying language’s syntax; ii) the language semantics and iii) the
description of the textual speciﬁcations into which the iconic compositions will
be translated.

5.1.       Syntax
The Picture Layout Grammar (PLG) formalism [14], is an attribute grammar
to formally specify visual languages. It assumes the existence of pre-deﬁned
terminal symbols and a set of spatial relation operators. Our acquaintance with
PLG formalism, from previous works, led us to use it to specify the syntax of
VisualLISA. Listings 2 present some rules of the language speciﬁcation. For
the sake of space we only present the key rules of the speciﬁcation; the missing
productions are comparable to those shown.
    Figure 2 shows the concrete and connector icons used for VisualLISA
speciﬁcations. LeftSymbol is the LHS of a production, while NonTerminal and
Terminal are used to compose the RHS. The second line of icons in Figure 2
presents the several classes of attributes. Function and Identity, both repre-
senting operations, are used to compute the attribute values. The other icons
connect the concrete symbols with each other, to rig up the AG.

Listing 2. VisualLISA Partial Syntax Deﬁnition.

  1   AG → c o n t a i n s ( VIEW , ROOT)                    1   RULE ELEM → FUNCTION
  2                                                          2             | IDENTITY
  3   VIEW → l a b e l s ( t e x t , rectangle )             3             | FUNCTION ARG
  4                                                          4             | FUNCTION OUT
  5   ROOT → l e f t t o (PRODS, SPECS)                      5
  6                                                          6   TERMINAL → l a b e l s ( t e x t , rectangle )
  7   SPECS → c o n t a i n s ( VIEW ,                       7
  8          over (LEXEMES, USER FUNCS) )                    8   INT ATTRIBUTE → l a b e l s ( t e x t , t r i a n g l e )
  9                                                          9
 10   PRODS → g r o u p o f (SEMPROD)                       10   INT CONNECTION → p o i n t s f r o m (
 11                                                         11                   points to (
 12   SEMPROD → c o n t a i n s ( VIEW , l e f t t o (      12                    dash line ,
 13     g r o u p o f ( g r o u p o f (RULE ELEM) ) ,       13                    ∼INT ATTRIBUTE ) ,
 14     g r o u p o f (AG ELEM) ) )                         14                    ∼TERMINAL )
 15                                                         15
 16   AG ELEM → LEFT SYMBOL                                 16   FUNCTION → over ( rectangle , t e x t )
 17           | NON TERMINAL                                17
 18           | TERMINAL                                    18   FUNCTION OUT → p o i n t s f r o m (
 19           | SYNT ATTRIBUTE                              19              p o i n t s t o ( arrow ,
 20           | INH ATTRIBUTE                               20              ∼INH ATTRIBUTE ) ,
 21           | TREE BRANCH                                 21              ∼FUNCTION)
 22           | INT ATTRIBUTE                               22                 | points from (
 23           | SYNT CONNECTION                             23              p o i n t s t o ( arrow ,
 24           | INH CONNECTION                              24              ∼SYNT ATTRIBUTE ) ,
 25           | INT CONNECTION                              25              ∼FUNCTION)




270                                                      ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                       VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars



          LeftSymbol                 NonTerminal                Terminal


          SyntAttribute               InhAttribute        IntrinsicValueAttribute


            Function                SyntConnection            InhConnection


        IntrinsicValueConnection                           FunctionArg


          FunctionOut                   Identity               TreeBranch

Fig. 2. The Icons of VisualLISA




5.2.   Semantics


In order to correctly specify an AG, many semantic constraints must hold. These
constraints are related with the attribute values that depend on the context in
which the associated symbols occur in a sentence. We separated these con-
straints into two major groups. One concerning the syntactic rules, Production
Constraints (PC), and another the respective computation rules, Computation
Rules Constraints (CRC).
    The following statements are representative constraints of VisualLISA’s
semantic correctness, concerning the two groups identiﬁed before:
    PC: The data type of an attribute X.a in a production, must be the same in
any production where X.a occurs.
    CRC: The type of the target attribute and the return type of a function, when
they are connected by a FunctionOut symbol, must match.
    The complete set of constraints can be seen in [9].



5.3.   Translation


The translation (Ls → τ → Lt ) is the transformation of a source language
into a target language. τ is a mapping between the productions of the Ls
(VisualLISA) and the fragments of Lt (LISAsl ∪ X AGra). These fragments
will be speciﬁed in this sub-section.
    A Context Free Grammar (CFG) is a formal and robust way of representing
LISA speciﬁcations’ structure. Listing 3 presents that high-level CFG.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                     271
Nuno Oliveira et al.



      Listing 3. LISA structure in a CFG.
  1   p1 : LisaML                → language i d { Body }
  2   p2 : Body                  → Lexicon A t t r i b u t e s P r o d u c t i o n s Methods
  3   p3 : Lexicon               → lexicon { LexBody }
  4   p4 : LexBody               → ( regName regExp ) 
  5   p5 : A t t r i b u t e s   → a t t r i b u t e s ( t y p e symbol . attName ; ) 
  6   p6 : P r o d u c t i o n s → rule id { Derivation } ;
  7   p7 : D e r i v a t i o n   → symbol : : = Symbs compute { SemOperations }
  8   p8 : Symbs                 → symbol+
  9   p9 :                       | epsilon
 10   p10 : SemOperations → symbol . attName = O p e r a t i o n ;
 11   p11 : O p e r a t i o n    → ...
 12   p12 : Methods              → method i d { j a v a D e c l a r a t i o n s }



   Reserved words, written in bold, enhance the main fragments in a LISA
sentence, making it more readable. The deﬁnition of smaller chunks, introduced
by each keyword, enables a more modular processing (code generation. . . )
   Regarding the literature, there is not an XML standard notation for AGs. So
that, X AGra was deﬁned using a schema. The whole structure of this schema
can be seen in detail in Section 9.


6. DEViL - A Tool for Automatic Generation of Visual
   Programming Environments

We searched for VPE generators like MetaEdit+ [15], but their commercial na-
ture was not viable for an academic research. Also, we experimented VLDesk [16],
Tiger [17], Atom3 [18] and other similar tools, however none of them gave us
the ﬂexibility that DEViL offered, as described below.
    The DEViL system generates editors for visual languages from high-level
speciﬁcations. DEViL (Development Environment for Visual Languages) has
been developed at the University of Paderborn in Germany and is used in many
nameable industrial and educational projects.
    The editors generated by DEViL offer syntax-directed editing and all fea-
tures of commonly used editors like multi-document environment, copy-and-
paste, printing, save and load of examples. Usability of the generated editors
and DEViL itself can be found in [11]. DEViL is based on the compiler genera-
tor framework Eli [19], hence all of Eli’s features can be used as well. Specially
the semantic analysis module can be used to verify a visual language instance
and to produce a source-to-source translation.
    To specify an editor in DEViL we have to deﬁne the semantic model of the
visual language at ﬁrst. It is deﬁned by the domain speciﬁc language DEViL
Structure Speciﬁcation Language (DSSL) which is inspired by object-oriented
languages and offers classes, inheritance, aggregation and the deﬁnition of at-
tributes. The next speciﬁcation step is to deﬁne a concrete graphical represen-
tation for the visual language. It is done by attaching so called visual patterns
to the semantic model of the VL speciﬁed in DSSL. Classes and attributes of
DSSL inherit from these visual patterns. Visual patterns [20] describe in what
way parts of the syntax tree of the VL are represented graphically, e.g. we can
model that some part should be represented as a “set” or as a “matrix”. DEViL
offers a huge library of precoined patterns like formulae, lists, tables or image




272                                                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                     VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


primitives. All visual patterns can be adapted through control attributes. E.g.
we can deﬁne paddings or colors of all graphical primitives. Technically visual
patterns are decorated to the syntax tree by specifying some easy inheritance
rules in a DSL called LIDO.
    To analyse the visual language, DEViL offers several ways. The ﬁrst one re-
sults from the fact that editors generated by DEViL are syntax directed. Hence,
the user cannot construct wrong instances of the VL It is limited by its syntax
and cardinalities expressed in DSSL. Another way is to deﬁne check rules e.g.
to check the range of an integer attribute or to do a simple name analysis on a
name attribute. To navigate through the structure tree of the VL, DEViL offers
so called path expressions which are inspired by XPath. They can be used in
a small simple DSL to reach every node in the tree. After analysis, DEViL can
generate code from the VL instance. This is done with the help of Eli which
offers unparsers, template mechanism (Pattern-based Text Generator — PTG)
and the well-known attribute evaluators from compiler construction.


7.     Implementation of VisualLISA

To implement VisualLISA, we could have followed a non systematic way, re-
sorting to usual software development methods. But our know-how on compiler
construction led us to reuse the systematic generative approach followed in that
area. In this case, the implementation process will be supported by the formal
speciﬁcation made in Section 5, and automated by the VPE chosen, DEViL.
Adopting the standard compiler construction process to the DEViL usage pe-
culiarities, we will follow a four-step process: i) Abstract Syntax Speciﬁcation; ii)
Interaction and Layout Deﬁnition; iii) Semantics Implementation; and iv) Code
Generation.


7.1.   Abstract Syntax

The speciﬁcation of the abstract syntax of VisualLISA, in DEViL, follows an
object-oriented notation, as referred previously. This means that the nontermi-
nal symbols of the grammar are deﬁned modularly: the symbols can be seen
as classes and the attributes of the symbols as class attributes.
   The syntax of the visual language is determined by the relations among their
symbols. Therefore, for an high level representation of the language’s syntax,
a class diagram can be used. This diagram should meet the structure of the
PLG model in Figure 2. The ﬁnal speciﬁcation for the language is then an easy
manual process of converting the diagram into DSSL. Figure 3 shows a small
example of the diagram and the resultant speciﬁcation.
   There are two types of classes in this notation: concrete and abstract. The
concrete classes are used to produce a syntax tree, which is manipulated in the
other steps of the environment implementation. The abstract classes, besides
the normal inheritance properties can be used to deﬁne syntactic constraints.
These classes generate the syntax-directed editor.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                  273
Nuno Oliveira et al.




                                                         CLASS Root {                                1
                                                           name : VAL V L S t r i n g ;              2
                                                           semprods : SUB Semprod∗;                  3
                                                           d e f s : SUB D e f i n i t i o n s ! ;   4
                                                           l i b r a r y : SUB L i b r a r y ? ;     5
                                                         }                                           6




Fig. 3. Class Diagram and Respective DEViL Notation




    In order to make possible the speciﬁcation of separated computation rules
reusing the same layout of a production, we used DEViL’s concept of coupled
structures [21]. It couples the syntactic structure of two structure tree — for
VisualLISA we used the structure of symbol Semprod, which is used to model
a production. In practice, it means that the layout deﬁned for a production is
replicated whenever a computation rule is deﬁned, maintaining both models
synchronized all the time.


7.2.      Interaction and Layout

The implementation of this part, in DEViL, consists of the deﬁnition of views.
A view can be seen as a window with a dock and an editing area where the
language icons are used to specify the drawing.
   VisualLISA Editor is based on four views: rootView, to create a list of
productions; prodsView, to model the production layout; rulesView, to specify
the semantic rules reusing the production layout and defsView, to declare global
deﬁnitions of the grammar.
   At ﬁrst the buttons of the dock, used to drag structure-objects into the edition
area, are deﬁned. Then the visual shape of the symbols of the grammar for the
respective view are deﬁned. Figure 4 shows parts of view deﬁnitions and the
respective results in the editor. The code on the left side of Figure 4 deﬁnes the
view, the buttons and the behavior of the buttons. The default action is the in-
sertion of a symbol in the editing area. The bluish rectangular image represents
the button resultant from that code.


                                                            SYMBOL pview NonTerminal                     1
1 VIEW r o o t V i e w ROOT Root{
                                                            INHERITS VPForm                              2
2  BUTTON IMAGE ” img : : btnProd ”
                                                            COMPUTE                                      3
3    INSERTS Semprod
                                                             SYNT . drawing =                            4
4      INFO ” P r o d u c t i o n ” ;
                                                                 ADDROF( ntDrawing ) ;                   5
5 }
                                                            END;                                         6




Fig. 4. Parts of View Deﬁnitions and Respective Visual Outcomes




274                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                             VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


       Symbol NonTerminal is represented by the orange oval in Figure 4. The
    code on the right reveals the semantic computation to deﬁne the shape of that
    symbol. Shape and other visual aspects of the tree-grammar symbols are au-
    tomatically deﬁned associating, by inheritance, visual patterns.

    7.3.         Semantics
    As long as VisualLISA is deﬁned by an AG, the contextual conditions could be
    checked using the traditional approach. DEViL is very ﬂexible and offers some
    other ways to implement this veriﬁcation module. The approach used to develop
    VisualLISA, is completely focused on the contexts of the generated syntax
    tree. DEViL offers a tree-walker, that traverses the tree and for a given context
    — a symbol of that tree — executes a veriﬁcation code (callback-functions),
    returning an error whenever it occurs. With this approach it is easy to deﬁne
    data-structures helping the veriﬁcation process. This approach is very similar to
    the generic AG approach, but instead of attributes and semantic rules, it uses
    variables which are assigned by the result of queries on the tree of the model.
        Listing 4 shows the code for the implementation of a constraint deﬁned
    in [22].

    Listing 4. Implementation of Constraint: “Every NonTerminal speciﬁed in the
    grammar must be root of one production”
 1 c h e c k u t i l : : addCheck Semprod {
 2   set n [ l l e n g t h [ c : : g e t L i s t {$ o b j . grammarElements . CHILDREN [ LeftSymbol ] } ] ]
 3   set symbName [ c : : g e t {$ o b j . name . VALUE}]
 4   i f { $n == 0 } {
 5     r e t u r n ” P r o d u c t i o n ’ $symbName ’ must have one Root symbol ! ”
 6  } e l s e i f {$n > 1} {
 7     r e t u r n ” P r o d u c t i o n ’ $symbName ’ must have o n l y one Root symbol ! ”
 8  }
 9   return ” ”
10 }


    A considerable amount of the constraints deﬁned in Section 5.2 were veriﬁed
    resorting to the Identiﬁer Table, which is a well known strategy in language
    processing for that purpose.

    7.4.         Code Generation
    The last step of the implementation, concerning the translation of the visual AG
    into LISA or X AGra, can be done using the AG underlying the visual language
    (as usual in language processing). For this task, DEViL supports i) powerful
    mechanisms to ease the semantic rules deﬁnition; ii) facilities to extend the
    semantic rules by using functions and iii) a template language (PTG of Eli
    system) incorporation to structure out the output code.
        The use of patterns (templates) is not mandatory. But, as seen in the formal
    deﬁnition of LISA and X AGra notation (Section 5.3), both of them have static
    parts which do not vary from speciﬁcation to speciﬁcation. Hence templates are
    very handy here. Even with templates, the translation of the visual AG into text
    is not an easy task. Some problems arise from the fact that there is not a notion
    of order in a visual speciﬁcation. We used auxiliary functions to sort the RHS




    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                           275
Nuno Oliveira et al.


symbols by regarding their disposition over an imaginary X-axe. Based on this
approach we also solved issues like the numbering of repeated symbols in the
production deﬁnition.
    The templates (invoked like functions) and the auxiliary functions, together
with other speciﬁc entities, were assembled into semantic rules in order to de-
ﬁne the translation module. One module was deﬁned for each target notation.
New translation modules can be added, to support new target notations.


8. AG Speciﬁcation in VisualLISA

Figure 5 shows the editor look and feel, presenting the four views of our editor.




Fig. 5. VisualLISA Editor Environment




     To specify an attribute grammar the user starts by declaring the productions
(in rootView) and rigging them up by dragging the symbols from the dock to the
editing area (in prodsView), as commonly done in VPEs. The combination of
the symbols is almost automatic, since the editing is syntax-directed. When the
production is speciﬁed, and the attributes are already attached to the symbols,
the next step is to deﬁne the computation rules. Once again, the user drags
the symbols from the dock, in rulesView, to the editing area, and compounds
the computations by linking attributes to each other using functions. Sometimes
it is necessary to resort to user-deﬁned functions that should be described in
defsView. In addition, he can import packages, deﬁne new data-types or deﬁne
global lexemes.




276                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                          VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


        As example we present a simple AG , called Students Grammar, used to
    process a list of students, described by their names and ages. The objective of
    this AG is to sum the ages of all the students. This grammar can be textually
    deﬁned as shown in Listing 5.


    Listing 5. Students Grammar
1   P1 : Students → Student Students {Students0 . sum = Student . age + Students1 . sum}
2   P2 : Students → Student          { Students . sum = Student . age}
3   P3 : Student → name age          { Student . age = age . v a l u e }



       Figures 6 and 7 show the three productions that constitute the grammar.
       In Figure 6, the attributes are associated with the symbols of the production.
    Moreover, the production has a semantic rule that computes the value of the
    LHS’s attribute, sum, by adding the value of the attributes in the RHS symbols,
    sum and age, using an inline function named SumAges




    Fig. 6. Speciﬁcation of production P1 with associated semantics



        In Figure 7 (a), the identity function is used to copy the value of the attribute
    age to the attribute sum. In Figure 7 (b), the third production, makes use of
    terminal symbols and associated intrinsic values. The computation rule, in this
    production, is based on the conversion of the textual value of the age into an
    integer.
        When the grammar is completely speciﬁed and semantically correct, code
    can be generated. Figure 8 shows, in LISA and X AGra notations, the code
    generated for production P1 in Figure 6.


    9. X AGra- An XML dialect for Attribute Grammars
    In this section is deﬁned an XML dialect to cope with attribute grammars. We
    called it X AGra, which stands for XML dialect for Attribute Grammars.




    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                        277
Nuno Oliveira et al.




                                                                   (b)
                       (a)

Fig. 7. Speciﬁcation of Productions P2 and P3, (a) and (b) respectively, with associated
semantic rules.




                       (a)                                  (b)

Fig. 8. Code Generated for LISA (a) and XAGra (b) speciﬁcations.




278                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                     VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


     X AGra denotes the abstract representation of an AG. The notation deﬁned
here, is mainly based on the deﬁnition of AG presented in the Introduction, but
it also borrows parts from the notations inherent to various AG-based compiler
generator tools.
     One of the standardized ways to deﬁne a new XML dialect is the creation
of a schema, using the standard XML Schema Deﬁnition (XSD) language. For
the sake of space, the integral textual deﬁnition of X AGra’s schema is not pre-
sented, and for reasons of visibility and readability, the complete drawing of the
schema is broken into several important sub-parts. Figures 9 to 13 are used to
support the explanation of the dialect.
   X AGra’s root element was deﬁned as attributeGrammar. This element
has a single attribute, name, whose objective is to store the name of the gram-
mar, or the language that the grammar deﬁnes; and is a sequence of several
elements. These elements represent components of the formal deﬁnition of an
AG, incremented with extra parts related to the usage of AG-based compiler
generators.
   Table 1 deﬁnes a relation of inclusion between the X AGra notation elements
and the components that constitute the formal deﬁnition of an AG, which is re-
covered next:
                          AG = (T, N, S, P, A, R, C, T )


Table 1. Derivation of X AGra Notation From the Formal Deﬁnition of AG

                         X AGra Element ⊇ AG Components
                               symbols             T, N, S
                           attributesDecl             A
                          semanticProds           P, R, C, T
                            importations              ∅
                              functions               ∅



    The relations depicted in Table 1 give an overview about the information that
each element of X AGra notation will store. The following sections will describe
with more detail such elements and the information they store.
   Listing 6 presents a fragment of a grammar that computes the age of a set of
students. This example is used to compare the concrete notation of a compiler
generator to the XML fragments that are shown in the sequent ﬁgures.
   Next sections present a complete description of the elements of X AGra
scheme. However, the importations and functions elements are skipped, be-
cause their structure is simple and similar to the other parts shown.

9.1.   Element symbols
Figure 9 presents the schema for the element symbols. As the name suggests,
this element contains the declaration of the grammar’s vocabulary.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                279
     Nuno Oliveira et al.




     Listing 6. Example of Students Grammar
 1   language StudentsGra {
 2      lexicon{
 3            Name            [ A−Z ] [ a−z ] +
 4       ...
 5      }
 6       attributes
 7             i n t STUDENTS. sum ;
 8       ...
 9      r u l e Students 1 {
10            STUDENTS : : = STUDENT STUDENTS compute {
11                  STUDENTS. sum = STUDENTS [ 1 ] . sum + STUDENT. age ;
12            };
13      }
14       ...
15      method u s e r D e f i n i t i o n s {
16            import java . u t i l . ArrayList
17            p u b l i c i n t sum ( i n t x , i n t y ) {
18                 r e t u r n x+y ;
19            }
20      }
21   }




 1 <symbols>
 2      <t e r m i n a l s>
 3            <t e r m i n a l i d ="name">[ A−Z ] [ a−z ] +</ t e r m i n a l>
 4      </ t e r m i n a l s>
 5      <n o n t e r m i n a l s>
 6            <n o n t e r m i n a l i d ="students" />
 7      </ n o n t e r m i n a l s>
 8      <s t a r t n t ="students" />
 9 </ symbols>




     Fig. 9. X AGra Schema – Element Symbols: deﬁnition and example




     280                                                    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                           VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


        It is composed of a sequence of three elements: terminals, nontermi-
    nals and start.
        The element terminals is a sequence of zero or more elements named
    terminal, which, in its turn, has one attribute, id, used to store the name
    of a terminal symbol. This attribute is an identiﬁer, hence any instance of it,
    must be different from the others, and must be always instantiated. Besides the
    information kept on the attribute, this element has a textual content where the
    respective Regular Expression (RE) can be declared.
        The element nonterminals has similar structure. The difference lays on
    the fact that it represents a sequence of zero or more elements nonterminal
    which have no textual content. The attribute id has the same purpose as the
    attribute with the same name in the element terminal.
        Finally, the element start has a single attribute named nt. This attribute
    is used to refer the nonterminal (already deﬁned in the X AGra speciﬁcation),
    correspondent to the start symbol (or Axiom) of the AG.


    9.2.   Element attributesDecl

    This element is composed of a sequence of zero or more elements dec-
    laration. For the sake of readability, Figure 10 only depicts the structure
    of the element declaration, which is a sequence of one or more elements
    attribute. This one has three mandatory attributes: i) id – stores the name
    of the attribute being declared. Any kind of text can be used to deﬁne it, but it
    is always better to use the following notation: X.a, where X is the name of a
    symbol in T ∪N and a is the name of an attribute in A(X) . As it is an identiﬁer, it
    must be different from all other identiﬁers on the speciﬁcation; ii) type – stores
    the data type of the current attribute value and iii) class – deﬁnes the class of
    the attribute. It must be one of: InhAttribute, SyntAttribute and IntrinsicValueAt-
    tribute.




1 <a t t r i b u t e s D e c l>
2       <d e c l a r a t i o n>
3                <a t t r i b u t e i d ="students.sum" type="int" class="SyntAttribute" />
4       </ d e c l a r a t i o n>
5 </ a t t r i b u t e s D e c l>




    Fig. 10. X AGra Schema – Element Attribute Declarations: deﬁnition and example




    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                           281
    Nuno Oliveira et al.


    9.3.   Element semanticProds

    The element semanticProds represents the structure to deﬁne productions
    and associated semantic rules in X AGra speciﬁcations. This structure is com-
    posed of a sequence of zero or more elements semanticProd. Each seman-
    ticProd has one single attribute, name, used to store the mandatory name of
    the production, as an identiﬁer.
        Element semanticProd has three direct descendants: lhs, rhs, com-
    putation, whose structure is explained in the next paragraphs and that are
    depicted in Figures 11, 12 and 13.
        Element lhs (Figure 11) is used to refer to the nonterminal symbol on the
    LHS of the production. This element has a single attribute, nt, to refer to an
    existent nonterminal.




1   <l h s n t ="students" />


    Fig. 11. X AGra Schema – Element Semantic Productions: LHS deﬁnition and example




        Element rhs (Figure 12), stores the nonterminals on the RHS of a produc-
    tion. It is composed of a sequence of zero or more elements element. For
    this purpose, each element, has a single attribute, symbol, which is manda-
    tory and represents a reference to a terminal or nonterminal symbol, already
    instantiated in the initial symbols structure.




1 <r h s>
2       <element symbol="student" />
3       <element symbol="students" />
4 </ r h s>




    Fig. 12. X AGra Schema – Element Semantic Productions: RHS deﬁnition and example




        Element computation (Figure 13) is the last child of the element seman-
    ticProds. It represents an hard concept of AGs: the semantic rules.
        This element has one attribute, name, used to give a name to the compu-
    tation being declared. This attribute, despite being mandatory, is not a unique
    identiﬁer: different computations can have equal names.
        The structure of computation represents a pure abstraction of what is a
    semantic rule in an AG deﬁnition: the attribute to which a value is assigned, and




    282                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars




1 <computation name="getTheSum">
2     <a s s i g n e d A t t r i b u t e a t t ="students.sum" p o s i t i o n ="0" />
3     <o p e r a t i o n r e t u r n T y p e ="int">
4          <argument a t t ="student.age" p o s i t i o n ="1" />
5          <argument a t t ="students.sum" p o s i t i o n ="2" />
6          <modus> $1 + $2 </ modus>
7     </ o p e r a t i o n>
8 </ computation>




    Fig. 13. X AGra Schema – Element Semantic Productions: Computation deﬁnition
    and example




    the operation that computes this value. Thus, the element computation has
    two children: the elements assignedAttribute and operation.
        Element assignedAttribute is composed of two mandatory attributes:
    att, which is used to refer to an attribute; and position, which is a number
    that identiﬁes the position of the symbol associated to the attribute in the list
    of elements of the production. That is, if the attribute is connected to the LHS,
    then the value for position must be 0. If the associated symbol belongs to the
    RHS, then its value should correspond to the position that the symbol occupies
    in the RHS sequence of symbols, starting with 1.
        The element operation aggregates a sequence of zero or more elements
    argument and a single element modus. In addition to the elements, it has an
    attribute, returnType, used to store the data type of the value returned by the
    operation.
        Elements argument are, in all aspects, equal to the assignedAttribute
    element. Each one has two attributes with the same name and the same se-
    mantic value underlaying, therefore they are used to refer to previous declared
    attributes. The difference is on the fact that this time, the attributes referenced
    are those used to compute the value in the operation.
        The last element, modus4 , which is a simple text ﬁeld to write the expression
    used to compute the value. Somehow, in this element’s text, a reference to the
    argument attributes should be made. An example (and the convention estab-
    lished) is using $x, where x > 0 is the position of the attribute in the sequence
    of arguments.

    4
        modus is a latin expression for way (of computing something, in our case)




    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                       283
Nuno Oliveira et al.


    Aside the importations and the functions parts, the X AGra’s schema is now
completely deﬁned and explained, revealing the universality needed to store
any AG for any AG-based compiler generator.
    Next section brieﬂy presents X AGraAl, demonstrating one interesting ap-
plicability of the X AGra dialect.


10.    Conclusion

After many years working in speciﬁcation and implementation of compilers sup-
ported by Attribute Grammars, it became clear that a modular and reusable
approach to AG development is highly recommendable and necessary. On the
other hand, the work on program comprehension tools emphasized the impor-
tance of software/data visualization. The combination of those two areas of R&D
with a third one, the development of Visual Languages, gave rise to the proposal
of creating a VL for AGs, since there are no other tools allowing it, according to
our knowledge. The obligation to write text-based AG speciﬁcations imposed by
several compiler generator tools and the habitual way of sketching AGs on paper
in the form of a decorated tree, shortening the gap to the mental representation
of an AG, reinforced the appropriateness of that proposal.
    In this paper we introduced VisualLISA, a new Domain Speciﬁc Visual
Language, which enables the speciﬁcation of AGs in a visual manner and the
translation of that visual AG into LISA or X AGra (an XML notation to support
generic AG speciﬁcations). X AGra allows us to use this visual editor with other
compiler-compiler tools.
    We were mainly concerned with the design of the language, its formal and
automatic implementation. In this phase of our project we neither focused on
the usability of the language nor on its scalability. We focused on the spec-
iﬁcation, aiming at showing the formal work behind the visual outcome, and
on the implementation of the underlying environment to specify AGs. At this
point we highlighted the use of DEViL in order to create the desired environ-
ment, through a systematic approach of development. Also, an example was
presented to show the steps to build an AG with VisualLISA.
    In the future, it is our objective to perform at least, two experimental studies
involving VisualLISA: one to assess the usability of the language regarding
the visual vs textual approaches for developing AGs; and another one to test
the scalability of the language and environment, regarding the hypothesis that
it was created to cope with small AGs. We are also interested in assessing
the comprehension of AGs; maybe VisualLISA would be very handy on this
matter, working as AGs visualizer.
   Concerning the applicability of X AGra, we can translate it into the speciﬁc
notation of any compiler generator tool. We call X AGra loader to the pro-
gram that performs this translation. As future work, the following translators
are planed: X AGra into LISA (a traditional LR parser generator); X AGra into
AntLR (an LL parser generator, based on an extended BNF grammar); X AGra




284                                   ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                       VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


into Eli (an LR parser generator with special constructors). Finally, a translator
from X AGra to Yacc could be a challenging project.
    Also, we developed a Grammar Analyzer and Transformation tool, X AGraAl.
that takes as input an AG written in X AGra. Thus, the implementation of this tool
shows the applicability of X AGra as a universal and multi-purpose AG speciﬁ-
cation language.

References
 1. Pereira, M.J.V., Mernik, M., da Cruz, D., Henriques, P.R.: VisualLISA: a visual inter-
    face for an attribute grammar based compiler-compiler (short paper). In: CoRTA08
    — Compilers, Related Technologies and Applications, Bragança, Portugal. (July
    2008)
 2. Boshernitsan, M., Downes, M.: Visual programming languages: A survey. Technical
    report, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720 (December 2004)
 3. Kastens, U., Schmidt, C.: VL-Eli: A generator for visual languages - system demon-
    stration. Electr. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 65(3) (2002)
 4. Costagliola, G., Tortora, G., Oreﬁce, S., De Lucia, A.: Automatic generation of visual
    programming environments. Computer 28(3) (1995) 56–66
 5. Mernik, M., Lenič, M., Avdičaušević, E., Žumer, V.: LISA: An interactive environment
    for programming language development. Compiler Construction (2002) 1–4
 6. Mernik, M., Korbar, N., Žumer, V.: LISA: a tool for automatic language implementa-
    tion. SIGPLAN Not. 30(4) (1995) 71–79
 7. Henriques, P.R., Pereira, M.J.V., Mernik, M., Lenič, M., Gray, J., Wu, H.: Automatic
    generation of language-based tools using the lisa system. Software, IEE Proceed-
    ings - 152(2) (2005) 54–69
 8. Parr, T.: The Deﬁnitive ANTLR Reference: Building Domain-Speciﬁc Languages.
    First edn. Pragmatic Programmers. Pragmatic Bookshelf (May 2007)
 9. Solutions, U.: Ultragram - parser generator. http://www.ultragram.com/ (January
    2010)
10. NorKen Technologies, I.: Programmar. http://www.programmar.com (January 2010)
11. Schmidt, C., Cramer, B., Kastens, U.: Usability evaluation of a system for implemen-
    tation of visual languages. In: Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-Centric
    Computing, Coeur d’Alène, Idaho, USA, IEEE Computer Society Press (September
    2007) 231–238
12. Ikezoe, Y., Sasaki, A., Ohshima, Y., Wakita, K., Sassa, M.: Systematic debugging of
    attribute grammars. In: AADEBUG. (2000)
13. da Cruz, D., Henriques, P.R.: Liss — the language and the compiler. In: Proceed-
    ings of the 1.st Conference on Compiler Related Technologies and Applications,
    CoRTA’07 — Universidade da Beira Interior, Portugal. (Jul 2007)
14. Golin, E.J.: A Method for the Speciﬁcation and Parsing of Visual Languages. PhD
    thesis, Brown University, Department of Computer Science, Providence, RI, USA
    (May 1991)
15. Tolvanen, J.P., Rossi, M.: Metaedit+: deﬁning and using domain-speciﬁc modeling
    languages and code generators. In: OOPSLA ’03: Companion of the 18th annual
    ACM SIGPLAN conference on Object-oriented programming, systems, languages,
    and applications, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2003) 92–93
16. Costagliola, G., Deufemia, V., Polese, G.: A framework for modeling and implement-
    ing visual notations with applications to software engineering. ACM Trans. Softw.
    Eng. Methodol. 13(4) (2004) 431–487




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                         285
Nuno Oliveira et al.


17. Ehrig, K., Ermel, C., Hänsgen, S., Taentzer, G.: Generation of visual editors as
    eclipse plug-ins. In: ASE ’05: Proceedings of the 20th IEEE/ACM international Con-
    ference on Automated software engineering, New York, NY, USA, ACM Press (2005)
    134–143
18. de Lara, J., Vangheluwe, H.: Atom3: A tool for multi-formalism and meta-modelling.
    In: FASE ’02: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Fundamental Ap-
    proaches to Software Engineering, London, UK, Springer-Verlag (2002) 174–188
19. Gray, R.W., Heuring, V.P., Levi, S.P., Sloane, A.M., Waite, W.M.: Eli: A complete,
    ﬂexible compiler construction system. Communications of the ACM 35(2) (February
    1992) 121–131
20. Schmidt, C., Kastens, U., Cramer, B.: Using DEViL for implementation of domain-
    speciﬁc visual languages. In: Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Domain-Speciﬁc
    Program Development, Nantes, France (July 2006)
21. Schmidt, C.:      Generierung von Struktureditoren für anspruchsvolle visuelle
    Sprachen. Dissertation, Universität Paderborn (January 2006)
22. Oliveira, N., Pereira, M.J.V., da Cruz, D., Henriques, P.R.: VisualLISA. Techni-
    cal report, Universidade do Minho (February 2009) www.di.uminho.pt/˜gepl/
    VisualLISA/documentation.php.
23. GlassFish: Java architecture for XML binding. https://jaxb.dev.java.net/
    (June 2009)
24. GlassFish: Java API for XML processing. https://jaxp.dev.java.net/ (June
    2009)
25. da Cruz, D., Oliveira, N., Henriques, P.R.: Graal - a grammar analyzer (September
    2009) Available at: http://inforum.org.pt/INForum2009/programa.


A.    X AGraAl: A grammar analyzer based on X AGra

In this section we give a brief introduction to X AGraAl, a Grammar Analyzer
and Transformation tool that computes dependencies among symbols, gram-
mar metrics, and grammar slices for a given criterion; moreover, X AGraAl can
also derive, from the original, shorter grammars combining slices or removing
unitary productions (similar to re-factoring a program). X AGraAl takes as input
an AG written in X AGra.
    X AGraAl is a platform independent tool, developed using Java. Java Archi-
tecture for XML Binding (JAXB) [23] and Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) [24]
were used to process the input.
    While parsing a X AGra grammar using JAXB, X AGraAl builds the identi-
ﬁers table (IdTab) where it collects all grammar symbols and attributes; each
identiﬁer is associated with all its characteristics extracted or inferred from the
source document. The identiﬁers table — that can be pretty-printed in HTML —
complemented by the dependence graph (DG) — also printable using Dot and
GraphViz — constitute the core of the tool. Traversing those internal represen-
tation structures, it is possible to implement the other X AGraAl functionalities:

 – Metrics, to assess grammar quality;
 – Slicing, to ease the analysis producing sub-grammars focussed in a speciﬁc
   symbol or attribute;




286                                    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                      VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


 – Re-factoring, to optimize grammars generating smaller and more efﬁcient
   versions.
Metrics are organized in three groups of assessment parameters:
 – Size metrics, that measure the number of symbols, productions, and so on
   (grammar and parser sizes);
 – Form metrics, that describe the recursion pattern and measure the depen-
   dencies between symbols (the grammar complexity);
 – Lexicographic metrics, that qualify the clearness/readablity of grammar iden-
   tiﬁers, based on a domain ontology.

Slicing operation builds partial grammar with the elements that derive in zero
or more steps on the criterion (backward slicing), or that are reachable from the
criterion (forward slicing). The criterion can be either a symbol or an attribute.
Slices are usually presented as paths over the dependence graphs. Figures 14
(a) and (b) illustrate a forward and a backward slice w.r.t the symbol age.




               (a)                         (b)                        (c)

Fig. 14. Slices with respect to symbol age: (a) Forward slice; (b) Backward slice and (c)
Combination of Forward and Backward slices



   Re-factoring is a not so usual functionality that transforms the original gram-
mar into a minimal one, removing all the useless productions. Another trans-
formation also provided is the generation of a new grammar combining forward
and backward slices with respect to the same symbol (see Figure 14 (c)).
   Built in a similar way, GraAL [25] accepts as input a grammar written in
AntLR 3 and produces the same outputs. However, X AGraAl beats GraAL in
terms of generality as it consumes a grammar written in XML.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                      287
Nuno Oliveira, received, from University of Minho, a B.Sc. in Computer Sci-
ence (2007) and a M.Sc. in Informatics (2009). He is a member of the Lan-
guage Processing group at CCTC (Computer Science and Technology Center),
University of Minho. He participated in several projects with focus on Visual
Languages and Program Comprehension; VisualLISA and Alma2 the main out-
come of his master thesis entitled ”Program Comprehension Tools for Domain-
Speciﬁc Languages”, are the most relevant works. The latter came under ”Pro-
gram Comprehension for Domain-Speciﬁc Languages”, a bilateral project be-
tween Portugal and Slovenia, funded by FCT. Currently, he is starting his PhD
studies on Patterns for Architectures Coordination Analysis and Self-Adaptive
Architectures, under MathIS, a research project also funded by FCT. Mean-
while he is an assistant-lecturer (practical classes) in a course on Imperative
Programming, at University of Minho.

Maria João Varanda Pereira, received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in com-
puter science from the University of Minho in 1996 and 2003 respectively. She
is a member of the Language Processing group in the Computer Science and
Technology Center , at the University of Minho. She is currently an adjunct
professor at the Technology and Management School of the Polytechnic In-
stitute of Bragança, on the Informatics and Communications Department and
vice-president of the same school. She usually teaches courses under the
broader area of programming: programming languages, algorithms and lan-
guage processing. But also some courses about project management. As a
researcher of gEPL, she is working with the development of compilers based
on attribute grammars, automatic generation tools, visual languages and pro-
gram understanding. She was also responsible for PCVIA project (Program
Comprehension by Visual Inspection and Animation), a FCT funded national
research project; She was involved in several bilateral cooperation projects with
University of Maribor (Slovenia) since 2000. The last one was about the subject
“Program Comprehension for Domain Speciﬁc Languages”.

Pedro Rangel Henriques, got a degree in “Electrotechnical/Electronics En-
gineering”, at FEUP (Porto University), and ﬁnished a Ph.D. thesis in “For-
mal Languages and Attribute Grammars” at University of Minho. In 1981 he
joined the Computer Science Department of University of Minho, where he
is a teacher/researcher. Since 1995 he is the coordinator of the “Language
Processing group” at CCTC (Computer Science and Technologies Center). He
teaches many different courses under the broader area of programming: Pro-
gramming Languages and Paradigms; Compilers, Grammar Engineering and
Software Analysis and Transformation; etc. Pedro Rangel Henriques has su-
pervised Ph.D. (11), and M.Sc. (13) thesis, and more than 50 graduating train-
ingships/projects, in the areas of: language processing (textual and visual), and
structured document processing; code analysis, program visulaization/anima-
tion and program comprehension; knowledge discovery from databases, data-
                     VisualLISA: A Visual Environment to Develop Attribute Grammars


mining, and data-cleaning. He is co-author of the “XML & XSL: da teoria a
prática” book, published by FCA in 2002; and has published 3 chapters in
books, and 20 journal papers.

Daniela da Cruz, received a degree in “Mathematics and Computer Science”,
at University of Minho, and now she is a Ph.D. student of “Computer Science”
also at University of Minho, under the MAPi doctoral program. She joined the re-
search and teaching team of “gEPL, the Language Processing group” in 2005.
She is teaching assistant in different courses in the area of Compilers and For-
mal Development of Language Processors; and Programming Languages and
Paradigms (Procedural, Logic, and OO). As a researcher of gEPL, Daniela is
working with the development of compilers based on attribute grammars and
automatic generation tools. She developed a completed compiler and a vir-
tual machine for the LISS language (an imperative and powerful programming
language conceived at UM). She was also involved in the PCVIA (Program
Comprehension by Visual Inspection and Animation), a FCT funded national
research project; in that context, Daniela worked in the implementation of “Alm”,
a program visualizer and animator tool for program understanding. Now she is
working in the intersection of formal veriﬁcation (design by contract) and code
analysis techniques, mainly slicing.

Bastian Cramer, received his degree in Computer Science from the University
of Paderborn, Germany in 2005. Then he joined the research group ’Program-
ming Languages and Compilers’ of Prof. Kastens at the same university. His
research focus is the generation of software from speciﬁcations and especially
the generation of environments for visual domain speciﬁc languages. He has
several years of experience in language design in corporation with the auto-
motive industry. Currently he is working on his PhD concerning simulation and
animation of visual languages.


Received: November 15, 2009; Accepted: February 24, 2010.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                289
UDC 004.4, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002291P


              Annotation Based Parser Generator*

     Jaroslav Porubän1, Michal Forgáþ1, Miroslav Sabo1, and Marek BČhálek2
       1
         Department of Computers and Informatics, Technical University of Košice,
                          Letná 9, 042 00 Košice, Slovak Republic
               {Jaroslav.Poruban, Michal.Forgac, Miroslav.Sabo}@tuke.sk
      2
        Department of Computer Science, FEI VŠB Technical University of Ostrava,
                17. listopadu 15, 708 33 Ostrava-Poruba, Czech Republic
                                   marek.behalek@vsb.cz



       Abstract. The paper presents innovative parser construction method
       and parser generator prototype which generates a computer language
       parser directly from a set of annotated classes in contrast to standard
       parser generators which specify concrete syntax of a computer language
       using BNF notation. A language with textual concrete syntax is defined
       upon the abstract syntax definition extended with annotations in the
       presented approach. Annotations define instances of concrete syntax
       patterns in a language. Abstract syntax of a language is inevitable input
       of the parser generator as well as language’s concrete syntax pattern
       definitions. The process of parser implementation is presented on the
       concrete computer language – the Simple Arithmetic Language. The
       paper summarizes results of the studies of implemented parser
       generator and describes its role in the university courses.
       Keywords: parser generator; annotated model; abstract syntax; model
       to grammar transformation.




1.     Introduction

Computer languages are crucial tools in the development of software
systems. By using computer languages we define the structure of a system
and its behavior. Today's common industry practice is to create a software
system as a composition of software artifacts written in more than one
computer language. Developers use different languages and paradigms
throughout the development of a software system according to a nature of
concrete subproblem and their preferences. Besides the general-purpose
programming languages (e. g. Java, C#) the domain-specific languages
(DSL) [1][2] have become popular in the last decade. Nowadays, DSLs have
their stable position in the development of software systems in many different


* This work is supported by APVV Grant No. SK-CZ-0095-07 – Cooperation in Design and
  Implementation of Language Systems and by VEGA Grant No. 1/4073/07 – Aspect-oriented
  Evolution of Complex Software System.
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


forms. Concerning abstraction level, it is possible to program closer to a
domain. Furthermore DSLs enables explicit separation of knowledge in the
system in natural structured form of domain. The growth of their popularity is
probably connected with the growth of XML technology and using of
standardized industry XML document parsers as a preferable option to the
construction of language specific processors. A developer with minimal
knowledge about language parsing is able to create a DSL with XML
compliant concrete syntax using tools like JAXB [3].
   Computer languages come in many flavors – as well known GPLs, DSLs,
but also as APIs, ontologies [4], and even others. The one of the today’s
hottest research topics in the field of computer language development is the
tooling support. In the paper we concentrate on the parser generators for
DSLs. Even though the research in the field of computer languages has the
long history and parser generators for a textual language processing like
YACC [5], Bison [6], JavaCC [7] and ANTLR [8] have their stable position in
the computer language development the task of developing a computer
language is still an expert task. Cook et al. [9] conclude that implementing a
textual DSL by implementing its grammar can be a difficult and error-prone
task, requiring significant expertise in language design and the use of a
parser generator. Similarly, Mernik et al. [1] argue that DSL development is
hard, requiring both domain knowledge and language development expertise.
We present the novel method of a computer language design and
implementation in the paper – abstract syntax driven parser generation.
   The rest of the paper has the following structure: In the section 2 we
present main ideas behind our approach to a computer language
development. The section 3 explains the method on example of simple but
extensible arithmetic language. Section 4 describes the parser generator
prototype –YAJCo. Section 5 summarizes the results of our experiments with
YAJCo parser generator. Section 6 compares our work with the state of the
art in the field of parser generators. The last section 7 concludes the paper
and outlines the possibilities for further research in the field of parser
generators and computer language development in general.



2.    Abstract Syntax Directed Language Definition

This section sketches the main ideas behind the innovative approach to the
definition of a concrete syntax for a computer language with textual notation.
Contrary to traditional methods of parser generation (e. g. YACC, JavaCC),
we focus on the definition of abstract syntax rather than giving an excessive
concentration on concrete syntax (see Fig. 1). In our approach the abstract
syntax of a language is formally defined using standard classes well known
from object-oriented programming and metamodels. Kleppe argues for
concentrating on abstract syntax and metamodels when we define a
computer language in [10].




292                                 ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                                                                    Annotation Based Parser Generator


                                  Concrete                        Abstract
                                                                                                          Semantics
                                   syntax                          syntax


                                  Traditional approach to a parser generation


                                                                                              Concrete
                                                                                               syntax
                                             Abstract
                                              syntax
                                                                                              Semantics

                                         Presented approach to a parser generation

Fig. 1. Comparing traditional and presented approaches to a computer language
parser generation


        Abstract
         Abstractsyntax
                  syntax
                 ([SUHVVLRQ

            1                 1                    Language Developer
                   1   1
                                              + YAJCo Parser Generator
                   1XPEHU          $GG
                                                       Tool Assistance
      6XE



                                                      Concrete
                                                       Concretesyntax
                                                                syntax
                                                          Abstract
                                                           Abstractsyntax
                                                                    syntax
                                                                     ( [ S U H V V LR Q

                                                              1                           1

                                                                        1        1
                                                                                                          YAJCo Parser Generator
                                                    6XE                 1 XPEHU               $GG
                                                                                                                          Parser
                                                                                                                           Parser

                                                 @Operator             @Token                 @Operator
                  Concrete Syntax
                                                      @Parentheses
                Pattern Extensions

Fig. 2. Generating Language Parser using YAJCo’s parser generation approach

   In our approach the language implementation begins with the concept
formalization in the form of abstract syntax. Language concepts are defined
as classes and relationships between them. Upon such defined abstract
syntax a developer defines both the concrete syntax through a set of source
code annotations and the language semantics through the object methods.
Annotations (called also attributes [11) are structured way of additional
knowledge incorporated directly into the source code. During the phase of
concrete syntax definition the parser generator assists a developer with
suggestions and hints for making the concrete syntax unambiguous. Fig. 2
shows the whole process of parser implementation using the described
approach. If the concrete syntax is unambiguously defined then parser
generator automatically generates the parser from annotated classes.
   It is quite common to have multiple notations for one language. RELAX NG
[12] is an example of such a language with two different notations – XML




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                                                     293
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


concrete syntax and compact concrete syntax. By using our approach
different notations of the same language can share both abstract syntax and
semantics. In some cases the evolution of concrete syntax does not require
the modification of abstract syntax and semantics at all. This means that other
notations of the same language are not affected by this type of language
evolution. For instance, Fig. 3 presents the language with four different
notations sharing the same abstract syntax and semantics. These notations
(concrete syntaxes) are textual notation, XML notation, in-memory object
notation and graphical notation. Concrete notations are interchangeable and
developer selects among them according to his preferences.

               Concrete syntax1                        Concrete syntax2
                textual notation                       graphical notation


                                   Abstract syntax

                                     Semantics


               Concrete syntax3                        Concrete syntax4
                 XML notation                           object notation


Fig. 3. Computer language with multiple notations and shared abstract syntax and
semantics




3.      SAL Example

This section presents our approach to a computer language definition using
annotated classes on the example of Simple Arithmetic Language (SAL). This
language expresses the arithmetic expressions with basic arithmetic binary
operations of addition and multiplication, and unary operation of arithmetic
negation. The expressions also contain integer numbers. The abstract syntax
of SAL can be formally defined using BNF as follows.

     e, e1, e2  Expression, n  Number
     e ::= Number n | UnaryMinus e | Add e1 e2 | Mul e1 e2

   Variables e, e1, e2 are metavariables from the Expression syntactical
domain and n is the metavariable from the Number syntactical domain. The
infix form of arithmetic operation is intentionally omitted to avoid the confusion
with concrete syntax. Prefix names in productions (e. g. UnaryMinus, Mul) are
used just to uniquely name the productions for semantic equations.
   The semantics of SAL is formally defined using Eval function which maps a
value from syntactic domain Expression to a value from semantic domain Z
(integers) and Value function which maps a value from syntactic domain
Number to a value from semantic domain Z.




294                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


  Eval : Expression o Z
  Value : Number o Z
  The semantic function Eval is defined by the following equations.
  Eval [| Number n |]           = Value [| n |]
  Eval [| UnaryMinus e |]       = – Eval [| e |]
  Eval [| Add e1 e2 |]          = Eval [| e1 |] + Eval [| e2 |]
  Eval [| Mul e1 e2 |]          = Eval [| e1 |] * Eval [| e2 |]
  Certainly we can find many different notations for SAL. For example, we
can write down a sentence from SAL in the following notation using standard
symbols and the operator infix form.
                                    1 + 2 * 7
  In the Fig. 4, abstract syntax tree of the sentence above is depicted.
                                     Add


                                           Mul
                        Number
                          1

                               Number               Number
                                 2                    7

Fig. 4. The abstract syntax tree of the expression 1 + 2 * 7

   From the Fig. 4 it is apparent that depicted abstract syntax tree contains
typed nodes corresponding to language concepts. The node types are Add,
Mul and Number. Add node represents the binary operation of addition. It
always has two child nodes respecting the nature of the binary operation of
addition. The Mul node represents multiplicative operation and the leaf node
Number represents an integer number. The Number node is attributed with
the notation of a number.
   Unlike traditional approach, language definition will not start with the
definition of SAL’s concrete syntax written in BNF. According to our approach,
the object classes representing syntactic domains (language concept) are
created at first. These classes define the abstract syntax of the language and
also the semantics of the language as stated in the previous formal definition
of the SAL. The concrete syntax will be specified later using source code
annotations, expressing the concrete syntax patterns and their
correspondence to the abstract syntax concepts.
   The main concept of the SAL is the Expression. It is pretty
straightforward because SAL is the language of expressions. On the other
side it is an abstract concept and it does not have concrete representation.
From the semantic point of view every expression can be evaluated to a
single integer value. This fact is denoted by semantic function eval of
Expression class.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                295
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


  abstract class Expression {
    //Semantic function – OOP method
    abstract int eval();
  }
   The Expression class is declared to be abstract because it only defines
the abstract concept of an expression from SAL and does not represent any
abstract syntax graph node. Next, the different types of expressions can be
incorporated into the SAL. The simplest form of an expression is a number
expression. Number has its notation and the value. Firstly we will focus is on
its value. The notation will be defined later during the definition of the concrete
syntax. It needs to be expressed that number is a simple expression as well.
This is done using “is-a” relationship, denoted with extends keyword in Java.
Corresponding semantic equations are denoted in the comments above the
methods. The code snippet below shows the class Number for integer
numbers.
  class Number extends Expression {
    int value;

      //Eval [| Number n |] = Value [| n |]
      int eval() {
         return value;
      }
  }
  The unary operation of negation is defined in the following snippet of the
UnaryMinus class.
  class UnaryMinus extends Expression {
    Expression expression;

      //Eval [| UnaryMinus e |] = – Eval [| e |]
      int eval() {
         return -expression.eval();
      }
  }
   Since the addition is a kind of arithmetic expression in SAL, the binary
operation of addition is defined in the class Add. Relationship “is-a” is
therefore used again.
  class Add extends Expression {
    Expression expression1;
    Expression expression2;

      //Eval [| Add e1 e2 |] = Eval [| e1 |] + Eval [| e2 |]
      int eval() {
         return expression1.eval() + expression2.eval();
      }
  }
  Operation of multiplication is defined in the same style as binary operation
Add.




296                                   ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                            Annotation Based Parser Generator


   The class diagram in the Fig. 5 shows the hierarchy of SAL classes. The
abstract syntax of arithmetic expression language has already been defined
as well as the semantic function Eval using the classic OOP notation. The
next step in the development of SAL is to define the concrete syntax for the
language. Concrete syntax will be used when expression (sentence) will be
stored in the textual form.
                                         1XPEHU




                                     1 ([SUHVVLRQ 1

                                          1             1
                                                    1                     -expression1
                -expression1

                                                               -expression2
                                                                               0XO
             8QDU\0LQXV
                               -expression1         -expression2

                                              $GG


Fig. 5. Classes and their hierarchy in the simple arithmetic language (SAL)

   The specification of concrete syntax requires some additional information
about textual representation of the language concepts. In SAL it is:
   x a number representation (notation),
   x notation for operations,
     x symbols for the operations of addition, multiplication and negation,
     x the form of the notation, the priority and associativity of all operations.
   The operations will be expressed in infix form using standard symbols +
and *. Unary operation of negation will be in the prefix form denoted with the
symbol -. The priority, associativity and symbols for the operations are listed
in Table 1. The integer numbers are written using standard decimal notation
with digits 0, 1, …, 9.

Table 1. Priority and associativity of SAL operators
         Operator                Priority                              Associativity
         +                       1                                     left
                                 (lowest)
         *                       2                                     left
         -                       3                                     right
                                 (highest)

  The class for integer numbers is augmented with concrete syntax source
annotations in the following code snippet.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                          297
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


  class Number extends Expression {
    int value;

      Number(@Token("VALUE") long value) {
        this.value = value;
      }

      int eval() {
        return value;
      }
  }
  The @Token annotation with VALUE attribute defines the name of a regular
expression for the number notation. As seen on the snippet the class
constructor is augmented with the concrete syntax pattern. The regular
expression can be defined as follows.
  @TokenDef(name = "VALUE", regexp = "[0-9]+")
   The format of a regular expression depends on the syntax for definition of
regular expressions. The annotation @Token("VALUE") can even be
omitted because the name of token can be derived directly from the name of
the parameter (value in this case). The domain class for binary operation of
addition augmented with concrete syntax annotations is shown below.
  class Add extends Expression {
    Expression expression1;
    Expression expression2;

      @Operator(
        associativity = Associativity.LEFT,
        priority = 1
      )
      Add(Expression expression1,
          @Before("+")
          Expression expression2) {
        this.expression1 = expression1;
        this.expression2 = expression2;
      }

      int eval() {
        return expression1.eval() + expression2.eval();
      }
  }
   Concrete syntax for the operation of addition is defined in the class
constructor. Parameters of constructor define the rule of composition of the
operation. In the constructor body it can be observed that addition is
composed of two expressions in textual form. It is important to notice that
after the first expression (and before the second expression at the same time)
token + will follow.
   Binary operation of multiplication is defined accordingly to the definition of
addition. The domain class for unary operation of arithmetic negation is




298                                 ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


augmented with concrete syntax annotations as shown in the code snippet
below.
     class UnaryMinus extends Expression {
       Expression expression;

         @Operator(priority = 3)
         UnaryMinus(
             @Before("-")
             Expression expression) {
           this.expression = expression;
         }

         int eval() {
           return -expression.eval();
         }
     }


   As seen in the constructor the operation is defined as unary prefix
operation.
   The last step in definition of the SAL’s concrete syntax is the definition for
parentheses. This can be achieved simply by using the annotation on abstract
class for expressions as shown below.
     @Parentheses(left = "(", right = ")")
       abstract class Expression {
         //...
     }
   Finally the concrete syntax for the language has been defined. The
implemented YAJCo parser generator generates the language parser from
annotated classes. The concrete syntax of SAL is automatically derived from
these classes, their relationships and concrete syntax annotations. In the
current implementation of the YAJCo it is the following LL(1) context-free
grammar.
     Expr1 ::= Expr2 {"+" Expr2}
     Expr2 ::= Expr3 {"*" Expr3}
     Expr3 ::= "-" Expr3 | Expr
     Expr ::= Number | "(" Expr1 ")"
     Number ::= [0-9]+



4.       YAJCo Parser Generator

The main goal of the approach is not to create a new parsing technology
based on context-free grammars theory. The main idea is to integrate existing
technologies into the higher level abstraction in which the language developer
does not have to concentrate on concrete parsing technology but on the




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                299
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


language itself describing the concepts and relationships between them with
abstract syntax in mind. The main characteristics of the approach are:
   x Orientation on abstract syntax and semantics of the language.
   x Definition of the concrete syntax independent from a parsing technology.
   x Automatic construction of abstract syntax tree from an input sentence.
   x Automatic construction of references between concept instances.
   x Error reporting in terms of language domain concepts.
   x Separation of language concepts on implementation level (concept
     types).
   x Tool support for language evolution (concept refactoring).
   As a proof of concept the parser generator YAJCo (Yet Another Java
Compiler cOmpiler) has been implemented. YAJCo generates language
parser from annotated classes. It is implemented as a standard Java
annotation processor which traverses through the source code of classes
looking for cocnrete syntax pattern annotations. YAJCo discovers relations
between classes. Two main relationships between classes used in the
definition of an abstract syntax are:
   x “is-a” relationship,
   x “has-a” relationship.
   Together with corresponding BNF productions they are depicted in the Fig.
6.
                A)                   6WDWHPHQW



                                                         Statement ::= If | While

                             :KLOH               ,I



                B)
                                        1   ([SUHVVLRQ
                                                         While ::= Expression Statement
                     :KLOH                               or
                                        1
                                                         While ::= Statement Expression
                                            6WDWHPHQW



Fig. 6. Abstract syntax relationships: A) “is-a” relationship, B) “has-a” relationship

   The “is-a” relationship is used also in the definition of concrete syntax, but
the “has-a” relationship has following drawbacks when defining the concrete
syntax:
   x Multiple notations for a single concept.
   x Lack of natural ordering for member variables defined in a class (except
      the order in a source code).
   x Data type conversion between concrete and abstract syntax (e. g.
      dropping the quotes from the string literal).
   All these drawbacks can be eliminated by using class constructor notation
(or factory methods notation) for the definition of concrete syntax. This is the




300                                                   ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


main reason why we annotate constructors and their parameters instead of
object fields as shown in the following example.
  While(
    @Before({"while", "("})
    @After(")")
    Expression expr,
    Statement stmt) {…}
  The previous example corresponds to the following BNF production of a
concrete syntax.
  While ::= 'while' '('Expression ')' Statement
  To define a transformation from abstract to concrete syntax a set of
concrete syntax annotation types has been created:
  x Structural annotations – mark the concept as optional or set the
    minimum and maximum number of occurrences - @Optional, @Range
  x Token annotations – specify binding of lexical units to abstract syntax
    concepts - @Before, @After, @Token, @Separator
  x Language pattern annotations – identify common computer language
    patterns
    x Operators: @Operator, @Parentheses
    x Identifiers and references: @Identifier, @References
  x Parser configuration annotations - @Parser, @TokenDef, @Skip
  Following print statement example presents the usage of some of the
annotations mentioned above.
  class Print extends Statement {
    @Before("print")
    @After(";")
    Print(
      @Separator(",")
      @Range(minOccurs = 1)
      Expression[] expressions) { ... }
  ...
  }
  The corresponding print language concept has the following notation.
  print expr1, ... , exprn;
  The next example presents annotated C language if statement.
  class If extends Statement {
    If(
      @Before({"if", "("})
      @After(")")
      Expression expression,
      Statement trueStatement,
      @Optional
      @Before("else")
      Statement falseStatement) {...}




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                301
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


  ...
  }
   Currently the JavaCC parser generator is used as the underlying parsing
technology. As an output YAJCo generates JavaCC grammar file augmented
with actions for constructing abstract syntax tree. Since the annotations are
independent of concrete parsing technology the output can also be generated
for other top-down or bottom-up parser generators (e. g. ANTLR [8]).
   Finally the parser for SAL with tokens and blank characters is defined using
@Parser annotation as shown in the code snippet.
  @Parser(
    className = "parser.expr.ExpressionParser",
    rootNode = "Expression",
    tokens = {
      @TokenDef(name = "VALUE", regexp = "[0-9]+")
    },
    skips = {
      @Skip(" "),
      @Skip("\t"),
      @Skip("\n")
    }
  )

         Language
          Language
        Specification
        Specification
                           Parser Generator - YAJCo
         Annotated
          Annotated
          Classes
           Classes             Java                  JavaCC
                                                      JavaCC
                                        generates     Input
                             Annotation                Input         JavaCC
                             Processor                 File
                                                        File
           Tokens,
            Tokens,
            white
             white
          characters              generates                    generates
           characters



                              YAJCo
                               YAJCo                uses           JavaCC
                                                                    JavaCC
                              Parser
                               Parser                               Parser
                                                                     Parser
                              Class
                               Class                               Classes
                                                                    Classes
                                                                           Parser
                                                                            Parser

Fig. 7. Generating parser using YAJCo parser generator – YAJCo architecture
overview

   Processing of annotated classes with developed parser generator YAJCo
is depicted in the Fig 7. After the generation of parser is complete it can be
simply embedded in any existing Java application. The following code snippet
is an example of embedding generated source code parser for SAL.
  String expr = "1 + 2 * 7";
  Expression expression = new
           ExpressionParser().parse(expr);
  long result = expression.eval();




302                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


5.    Experiments

To explore the full potential of the implemented approach and YAJCo parser
generator we have implemented seven computer languages, each of them
having a different character:
   x SAL – Simple Arithmetic Language,
   x AL – Arithmetic Language,
   x SIL – Structured Imperative Language,
   x PIL – Procedural Imperative Language,
   x GUIIL – Graphical User Interface Interaction Language,
   x SML – State Machine Language,
   x LAD – Language of Annotation Designator.
   SAL [17] and AL languages are simple computer languages for expressing
the arithmetic expressions. AL has been created incrementally from the SAL
in a few evolutionary steps. In every step some new constructs have been
incorporated into the language. SIL and PIL languages are the
representatives of general-purpose programming languages. PIL is
procedural Pascal-like language. These languages are greatly inspired by
traditional university compiler course languages. On the other hand the last
three languages GUIIL, SML and LAD are DSL languages oriented to
concrete domains. GUIIL is the language which describes the recipes for
graphical user interface task automation. SML is classic DSL for state
machines description [9]. LAD is DSL language for expressing the annotation
constraints. All mentioned languages were successfully implemented using
YAJCo parser generator. During the implementation of these computer
languages we have also defined some metrics to measure the following
implementation characteristics:
   x number of language concepts (defined by types - classes, interfaces,
      enumerations),
   x number of annotations in the implementation of language concepts
      categorized by annotation types,
   x comparison of annotated and unannotated language concepts,
   x characteristics of generated source code (number of source lines of
      code, number of characters).
   The results of experiments are summarized in Table 2 According to our
measurements the most complex language is PIL. This language contains the
largest number of language concepts. From the point of view of the number of
language concepts the simplest languages are SML and GUIIL. According to
the results the most common language concept representation is a concrete
class. Interfaces and abstract classes are interchangeable by the choice of
language developer. The most common concrete syntax annotation used in
experimental languages is @Before. This is a reasonable outcome since the
annotation specifies the lexical symbol preceding a concept. It is natural to
specify the concept with leading keyword (e.g. if, while, procedure). The
interesting fact is that approximately 25% of language concept types contain
no annotation. It is the fulfillment of the one of our aims - to minimize the




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                303
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


number of used annotations. The results also show that the SML language is
considerably verbose. The average number of concrete syntax annotations
per concept type in SML is 2.5. The following part from the SML sentence
presents the level of verbosity of the SML language.

Table 2. Results from the implementation of experimental languages using YAJCo
parser generator
            Types           SAL    AL        SIL       PIL       GUIIL    SML     LAD
Concrete class                 6     11        30         42          4      6       26
Abstract class                 1        3          2         3        1                 7
Interface                                                    2
Enumeration                                        1                                    1
Total                          7     14        33         47          5      6       34


         Annotation         SAL    AL        SIL       PIL       GUIIL    SML     LAD
After                                   1          9      13          1      1       13
Before                         5     10        28         37          2      8       23
Operator                       5     10        17         27                            8
Optional                                           1         1        1      1          3
Parentheses                    1        1          1         1                          2
Range                                              3                         2          2
Separator                                          3         2        1                 5
Token                                              2                         3          2
Total                         11     22        64         81          5     15       58


         Category           SAL    AL        SIL       PIL       GUIIL    SML     LAD
Number of annotated                  11        25         39          2      4       23
                               6
types
Number of types without
                               1        3          8         8        3      2       10
annotation
Average number of
                            1.57   1.57       1.94      1.72       1.00   2.50      1.71
annotations per type
Ratio of unannotated
                            0.14   0.21       0.24      0.17       0.60   0.33      0.29
types to all types


      Characteristics       SAL    AL        SIL       PIL       GUIIL    SML     LAD
Number of lexical units        8     16        37         40          7     11       37
Number of BNF rules            5        7      24         27          5      6       29
Number of source lines of
                             128    187       570        655        124    168      693
code generated by YAJCo
Number of characters
                            2458   3775     15912      17554       2854   4245    19559
generated by YAJCo
Number of source lines of   1487   1603      2567       2580       1516   1843     3849
code generated by




304                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


JavaCC
Number of characters
                        42103   45370    78450     78687     43869   52950   114002
generated by JavaCC

     transition from Ready to Running when water_high
   The average usage of concrete syntax annotation per one concept type in
all languages is less than 2. The main goal of the metrics definition was the
measurement of a language complexity based on abstract syntax since
abstract syntax directly defines concepts from a domain.
   The successful implementation of experimental languages proves the
viability of YAJCo parser generator. That was the main reason why we
decided to incorporate the tool in the university master course concerning
DSL implementation and model driven software development. More than 30
students have successfully used the YAJCo parser generator as a part of
their projects.



6.       Related Works

Currently there are a lot of parser generators for various programming
languages [5][6]. Classic parser generators like JavaCC [7] generate the
parser as a single huge class ignoring the concept of composition of language
concepts and concentrating on the concrete syntax of a language. These
tools are still greatly inspired by procedural nature of YACC-like tools. The
concrete syntax is specified in DSL of parser generator. It is usually a
language for writing the context free grammar enriched with constructs for
language semantics definition. During language development the developer is
often dealing with the type of parsing algorithm which is supported by
selected parser generator (e. g. LL, LR, LALR) and his decisions are forced
by the type of grammar supported by the tool. Even JJTree, a tool provided by
JavaCC for generating the abstract syntax tree from the textual
representation, is still driven by the point of view of concrete syntax grammar
rather than abstract syntax language concept. Consequently, changes made
to grammar must be also reflected in the representation of abstract syntax
nodes in programming languages. The semi-automatic refactoring of
generator’s DSL is still missing.
   On the other side, there is a notable growth in the field of language
workbenches [13] on the market. MDSD [14] tools like Microsoft Visual Studio
DSL Tools (software factories representative [15]) are being incorporated into
the programming IDEs. The primary orientation of these tools is graphical
notation of computer languages. However, the special support for textual
language notation is not provided.
   Authors in [16] propose another approach to mapping from abstract syntax
to concrete and back. Their solution is based on complex language rather
than concrete syntax patterns.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                305
Jaroslav Porubän, Michal Forgáþ, Miroslav Sabo, and Marek BČhálek


7.    Conclusion

In the paper we have presented solution for generating parsers for textual
languages. The language itself is specified by a set of annotated classes.
Annotations extend the classes with additional information required for
specification of concrete syntax, for example keywords and operator
notations. The developer can start with the definition of abstract syntax and
continue with creation of language in incremental way using the standard
refactoring tools. In proposed solution there is only one form of definition of
abstract syntax graph nodes – by the classes. The grammar is derived
directly from the source code of annotated domain classes. Even the
examples are written in object-oriented programming language Java our
solution is not strictly connected to Java language and can be easily ported to
any other object-oriented language supporting the attribute-oriented
programming. We believe that our solution can simplify the development of
textual software languages.



References

1.  Mernik, M., Heering, J., Sloane, A. M.: When and How to Develop Domain-
    Specific Languages. ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 37, No. 4, 316–344. (2005)
2. Pereira, M. J. V., Mernik, M., da Cruz, D., Henriques, P. R.: Program
    Comprehension for Domain-Specific Languages. ComSIS, Vol. 5, No. 2. (2008)
3. Ort, E., Mehta, B.: Java Architecture for XML Binding. Sun Microsystems, [Online].
    Available: http://java.sun.com/developer/technicalArticles/WebServices/jaxb
    (current November 2009)
4. Návrat, P., Bieliková, M., Chudá, D., Rozinajová, V.: Intelligent Information
    Processing in Semantically Enriched Web. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
    Vol. 5722/2009, 331-340. (2009)
5. Johnson, S. C.: YACC: Yet Another Compiler-Compiler. Unix Programmer's
    Manual Volume 2b. (1979)
6. Donnelly, C., Stallman, R.: Bison: The Yacc-compatible Parser Generator. (2006).
7. Java Compiler Compiler – The Java Parser Generator, (2009). [Online]. Available:
    https://javacc.dev.java.net (current November 2009)
8. Parr, T.: The Definitive ANTLR Reference: Building Domain-Specific Languages,
    Pragmatic Bookshelf, 376 pp. (2007)
9. Cook, S., Jones, G., Kent, S., Wills, A. C.: Domain-Specific Development with
    Visual Studio DSL Tools. Addison-Wesley Professional, 576 pp. (2007)
10. Kleppe, A. G.: A Language Description is More than a Metamodel. In: Fourth
    International Workshop on Software Language Engineering, 1 Oct 2007, Nashville,
    USA.
11. Cepa, V.: Attribute Enabled Software Development, VDM Verlag, 216 p. (2007)
12. van der Vlist, E.: Relax NG. O'Reilly Media, 304 pp. (2003)
13. Fowler, M.: Language Workbenches: The Killer-App for Domain Specific
    Languages? (2005) [Online]. (current November 2009) Available:
    http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/languageWorkbench.html
14. Stahl, T., Voelter, M.:Model-Driven Software Development: Technology,
    Engineering, Management. Wiley, 444 p. (2006)




306                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Annotation Based Parser Generator


15. Greenfield, J., Short, K., Cook, S., Kent, S., Crupi, J.: Software Factories:
    Assembling Applications with Patterns, Models, Frameworks, and Tools. Wiley,
    500 p. (2004)
16. Muller, P. A., Fondement, F., Fleurey, F., Hassenforder, M., Schneckenburger, R.,
    Gérard, S., Jézéquel, J. M.: Model-Driven Analysis and Synthesis of Textual
    Concrete Syntax. Journal on Software and Systems Modeling (SoSyM), Volume 7
    (4), Springer, 423-441. (2008)
17. Kollár, J., Václavík, P., Wassermann, ď.: Data driven Executable Language Model.
    In Proceedings of the International Multiconference on Computer Science and
    Information Technology, Mragowo, Poland, IEEE Computer Society Press, 667-
    675. (2009), ISSN 1896-7094.




Jaroslav Porubän is Associate professor at Department of Computers and
Informatics, Technical university of Košice, Slovakia. He received his MSc. in
Computer Science in 2000 and his PhD. in Computer Science in 2004. Since
2003 he is the member of the Department of Computers and Informatics at
Technical University of Košice. He was involved in the research of profiling
tools for process functional programming language. Currently the main
subject of his research is the computer language engineering concentrating
on design and implementation of domain-specific languages and computer
language composition and evolution.

Michal Forgáþ is Assistant professor at Department of Computers and
Informatics, Technical university of Košice, Slovakia. He received his MSc. in
2006 and his PhD. in Computer Science in 2009. Since 2009 he is the
member of the Department of Computers and Informatics at Technical
University of Košice. His scientific research is focused on the software
evolution, software language engineering and adaptation of complex software
systems.

Miroslav Sabo is doctoral student at Department of Computers and
Informatics, Technical University of Košice, Slovakia. He received his MSc. in
Computer Science in 2008. The subject of his research is the utilization of
generative methods in development and evolution of software systems in
permanently changing environment.

Marek BČhálek is Assistant professor at Department of Computer Science,
FEI VŠB Technical University of Ostrava, Czech Republic. He received his
MSc. in 2002. Since 2004 he is the member of the Department of Computer
Science at Technical University of Ostrava. His scientific research is focused
on programming languages, their evolution and application. Currently he is
developing a tool for modeling of embedded systems based on functional
programming paradigm.


Received: November 16, 2009; Accepted: December 25, 2009.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                  307
UDC 004.4, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002309C


         On Automata and Language Based Grammar
                          Metrics

                   Matej Črepinšek1 , Tomaž Kosar1 , Marjan Mernik1 ,
                    Julien Cervelle2 , Rémi Forax2 , Gilles Roussel2
     1
         University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science,
                             Smetanova 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia
               Email: {matej.crepinsek, tomaz.kosar, marjan.mernik}@uni-mb.si
             2
                Université Paris-Est, Laboratoire d’Informatique Gaspard-Monge,
                                 77454 Marne-la-Vallée, France
                 Email: {julien.cervelle, remi.forax, gilles.roussel}@univ-mlv.fr



          Abstract. Grammar metrics have been introduced to measure the qual-
          ity and the complexity of the formal grammars. The aim of this paper is to
          explore the meaning of these notions and to experiment, on several gram-
          mars of domain speciﬁc languages and of general-purpose languages,
          existing grammar metrics together with the new metrics that are based on
          grammar LR automaton and on the language recognized. We discuss the
          results of this experiment and focus on the comparison between gram-
          mars of domain speciﬁc languages as well as of general-purpose lan-
          guages and on the evolution of the metrics between several versions of
          the same language.



Keywords: grammar metrics, software language engineering, grammar engi-
neering, grammarware.


1.       Introduction

Grammar metrics were introduced to measure the quality and complexity of a
given grammar in order to orient grammar engineering (grammarware [17]). We
consider that existing metrics [23], more or less deduced from classical pro-
gram metrics or from the structure of the speciﬁcation, could be upgraded with
new metrics that are speciﬁc to grammar behavior and could provide additional
insights about the complexity of the grammar and the language generated by
this grammar. Of course, a single metrics alone cannot capture the quality of
the grammar, however a set of well chosen metrics could give interesting hints
to grammar developers.
    In order to complete the existing set of metrics, we propose two different
kinds of metrics3 . A ﬁrst set of metrics is computed from the LR automaton,
3
    This work is sponsored by bilateral project “Advanced Topics in Grammar Engineer-
    ing” (code BI-FR/08-09-PROTEUS-008) between Slovenia and France.
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


generated from the grammar. A second set is more related to the language
recognized, than to the grammar itself. These different kinds of metrics produce
results that are complementary for the grammar developers.
   In order to compute these metrics, we have developed a tool. As an input, it
takes ANTLR [22] or Tatoo [4, 5] grammars and computes classical metrics [23]
together with our new metrics. It uses Tatoo engine to construct the LR automa-
ton for these grammars.
   Using this tool we have computed the values of these metrics on several
grammars that form a good benchmark of grammars. These grammars cover
domain speciﬁc languages (DSL [20]) and general-purpose languages (GPL
[28]). They also cover the evolution of a grammar between different versions of
the language. From these experimentations, we discuss the different values of
the metrics.
   The structure of the paper is as follows. Presented in the Section 2 is related
work and existing metrics. In Section 3, the new metrics are deﬁned. Section
4 describes the tool and how it is linked to Tatoo. In Section 5, experimental
results on the grammars are detailed and discussed. In Section 6, some usage
guidelines are presented. Section 7 carries conclusions and remarks. In the
appendix, the computation of the closure application of rules is detailed.


2.    Overview of Related Work

In the ﬁeld of grammar metrics, only a few tools and papers exist. The most
pertinent of these tools is SynC tool by Power and Malloy [23]. In SynC tool,
grammar metrics are divided into size and structural metrics. In the ﬁrst met-
rics group, an adaptation of standard metrics for programs [13], the following
grammar size metrics are deﬁned [23]:

 – term – number of terminals,
 – var – number of non-terminals,
 – mcc – McCabe cyclomatic complexity,
 – avs – average size of right hand side, and
 – hal – Halstead effort.

Size metrics feature useful information about the grammars. More maintenance
is expected for grammars with large numbers of non-terminals (var). The mcc
provides the number of alternatives for non-terminals. The mcc value indicates
the effort required for grammar testing and a greater potential for parsing con-
ﬂicts. A big avs value points to less readable grammar as well as it impacts on
the parsers’ performance, because symbols have to be placed on the parser
stack. The hal value evaluates grammar designers’ efforts to understand the
grammar.
    Structural metrics for grammars are derived from grammatical levels [8],
where a grammar is represented as a graph. In the graph, the nodes are non-
terminals and the edges represent a successor relationship between a left hand




310                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


side non-terminal and a non-terminal on the right hand side. In order to com-
pute structural metrics, we compute the strongly connected components of the
graph, which leads to a partition of the set of non-terminals into grammatical
levels. We use the following structural metrics, as deﬁned in [23]:

 – timp – tree impurity,
 – clev – normalized counts of levels,
 – nslev – number of non-singleton levels,
 – dep – size of largest level, and
 – vhei – Varju height metrics.

    Tree impurity (timp) measures how much the graph resembles a tree (0% –
graph is a tree, 100% – graph is fully connected). A high timp value for a gram-
mar means that refactoring, the grammar will be complicated, since a change
in one rule may impact many other rules. A normalized count of levels (clev)
is the normalization of the number of grammatical levels by the total number of
non-terminals expressed in percentage. A high clev indicates more opportu-
nities for grammar modularization. Many of the equivalence classes are of size
1, while language concepts such as declarations, expressions, and commands
tend to be represented by larger classes. The (nslev) metrics identiﬁes the
number of such classes. The size of the largest level (dep) metrics measures
the number of non-terminals in the largest grammatical level. A high dep in-
dicates an uneven distribution of the non-terminals among grammatical levels.
The Varju height metrics (vhei) is the maximum distance of any non-terminal
from the start symbol, and is expressed as a percentage of the number of equiv-
alence classes.
    Paper [3] presents a methodology for iterative grammar development. Well-
known techniques from software engineering are applied to the development

 – version control,
 – grammar metrics,
 – unit testing, and
 – test coverage analysis.

   It demonstrates how these techniques can make grammar development a
controlled process. As mentioned above, one of the techniques used involves
grammar metrics. Authors use size and structural metrics deﬁned in [23] and
extend them with disambiguation metrics, which are SDF [15] speciﬁc:

 – frst – number of follow restrictions,
 – rejp – number of reject productions,
 – assoc – number of associativity attributes, and
 – upp – number of unique productions in priorities.

   These metrics merely count the various types of disambiguation in the SDF
notation. Aside from Halstead’s effort metrics, some of the ingredient metrics
and related metrics are presented and used for grammar engineering. In a




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                             311
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


similar manner, as done in this work, we propose new metrics, which brings
additional insights into grammar development.
   One of the applications for grammar metrics is also in the ﬁeld of gram-
mar testing. The concept of grammar testing is explained in [18]. This paper
presents context-dependent branch coverage on parser testing and grammar
recovery; it proposes new tests for checking the accuracy and the complete-
ness of grammars. We believe that our grammars’ metrics could be a valuable
contribution to the ﬁeld of grammar testing, used as effort estimation in grammar
engineering (i.e., software engineering applied to grammars).


3.     Proposed New Metrics

In this section, we describe in detail two new kinds of metrics, LR table-based
metrics and generated-language based metrics.


3.1.   LR Table Metrics

The ﬁrst set of metrics is based on the LR automaton that is used to produce an
efﬁcient bottom-up parsers for the grammar, but could also simulate top-down
parsing [25], comparable to LL parsers. It is surprising that information given by
this automaton has never been used before to qualify grammars.
    The LR states are built using the following algorithm. A more detailed de-
scription of this algorithm can be found in [2].
    First, the grammar is increased by adding a new production

                                      X → S EOT

where S is the start symbol of the grammar, X a fresh non-terminal which be-
comes the new axiom and EOT, a fresh terminal which symbolizes the end of
input.



                            E → (E)|E + E|E − E| − E|id


Fig. 1. Grammar G1


    States of the LR automaton are deﬁned by a set of items. An item is a
production where an inter-letter space is marked (usually with a dot) on the
right-hand side. The set of items deﬁnes all of the productions that can be found
at this stage of the parsing. For instance, for the grammar G1 described in Fig. 1,
after reading «(E + E» (the E means that a word derived from E is recognized)
the state contains:




312                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


                                    E → E · +E
                                    E → E · −E
                                    E → E + E·
    The item E → E + E· indicates that «E + E» has been read and will be
considered as a single E, while the item E → E · −E indicates that the second
E is part of an E − E expression that will be considered as a single E.
    Note that the information that a «(» has been read, is kept in the state stack
of the parser, not in the LR state.
    Only the initial state contains the item:
                                     X → ·S EOT
States are built by applying a creation rule to existing states, until a new state
cannot be built.
    To explain this rule, we ﬁrst deﬁne the closure C(I) of an item I as the small-
est set to verify the following set of equations, where P is the set of productions
of the grammar:
 – I ∈ C(I);
 – ∀E → α · Xβ ∈ C(I) and ∀X → γ ∈ P,
   then X → ·γ ∈ C(I).
The closure of a state is deﬁned as the union of the closure of its items.
    Then, new states are built from a state St by applying the following rule: for
each terminal or non-terminal v such that an item X → α · vβ is in C(St), the
following state is created
                         {Y → δv · ζ| Y → δ · vζ ∈ C(St)}
If v is a terminal, we say that the state St can shift the terminal v.
     The set of LR states for the grammar G1 computed using previous algorithm
is the following:
                    {X → ·E EOT}
                    {X → E EOT·}
                    {E → (·E)}
                    {E → − · E}
                    {E → id·}
                    {E → (E)·}
                    {X → E · EOT, E → E · +E, E → E · −E}
                    {E → E + ·E}
                    {E → E − ·E}
                    {E → (E·), E → E · +E, E → E · −E}
                    {E → −E·, E → E · +E, E → E · −E}
                    {E → E + E·, E → E · +E, E → E · −E}
                    {E → E − E·, E → E · +E, E → E · −E}




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                313
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


In the last state, for instance, the terminals + and − can be shifted.
    From the possible metrics that can be extracted from the LR automaton we
have chosen the following:

 – The metrics lrs represents the number of states in the LR automaton. This
   number is 13 for the grammar G1 . This metrics captures the complexity of
   the grammar.
 – The lat metrics sums, for each terminal in the grammar, the number of
   states in the LR automaton that does not lead to an error when this terminal
   is in the lookahead, and it is normalized by the number of terminals. This
   metrics gives an idea for each terminal of the probability to accept it during
   the parsing.
 – Metrics lat can be further normalized by the number of states lrs. Metrics
   lat/lrs computes complexity of relations between the terminals and the
   states in LR tables.
 – The metrics lrtla sums, for each state in the automaton, the number of
   terminals that, when they are in the lookahead, do not lead to an error
   in this state, and it is normalized by the number of states. It indicates the
   complexity of each state in the automaton. If we normalize metrics lrtla
   by the number of terminals we get metrics lat/lrs.
 – The metrics lcc counts the number of LR conﬂicts. These conﬂicts are shift-
   reduce or reduce-reduce conﬂicts found in some of the states. The lcc met-
   rics gives an insight into the complexity of the grammar. Indeed, the conﬂicts
   solved by priority/associativity rules could also be solved by rewriting the
   grammar instead of introducing unnecessary productions that degrade the
   readability of the grammar [2]. Note that conﬂicts may be implicitly resolved
   by many compiler generators. A shift-reduce conﬂict is resolved implicitly
   by choosing to shift over reduce. On the other hand a reduce-reduce con-
   ﬂict is resolved implicitly by choosing to reduce the rule that ﬁrst appears in
   the grammar. However, every such conﬂict should be carefully studied and
   checked if default behavior is indeed appropriate. Conﬂicts certainly raise
   the complexity of the grammar and lcc metric captures it.


3.2.   Generated Language Metrics

The second set of proposed metrics is based on some of the characteristics of
the language recognized. The following metrics, discussed in more detail below,
are proposed: ss, ssm, ltps, ltpsm, ltpsa, and ltpsn.
    The metrics ss builds, for each production, the shortest sample that uses
it and stores the average size of these samples. This metrics provides hints of
the verbosity of the language produced by the grammar. The metrics ssm is the
maximum size of the samples.
    The shortest sample for a production is produced using a recursive algo-
rithm. More precisely, the algorithm for computing the shortest sample using a
production in a grammar consists in three steps. The ﬁrst is the computation,
from each non-terminal, of the shortest word made of terminals derived from




314                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                   On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


this non-terminal. The second step is the computation, for any non-terminal N ,
of the shortest word generated by an axiom, that is only made of terminals and
one occurrence of N , which we call the sequel of the shortest word leading to
X. Details of these ﬁrst two steps can be found in appendix. Once these ﬁrst two
steps are accomplished, to get the shortest sample using production X → α,
one starts with the word w obtained in step two for non-terminal X, replace X
by α in w and ﬁnally replace all remaining non-terminals with the shortest words
computed in step one.
    The word produced is still the shortest since, if a shorter one exists, either its
derivation tree would lead to a shortest way to produce a word that contains X
or the shortest words for non-terminals of α. Since the ﬁrst two steps are done
using a closure operation on rules, if only the shortest sample for one single
production needs to be computed, one can save computation time using a lazy
and dynamic programming style, as it is done in Tatoo.
    For instance for grammar G1 , the set of the shortest samples produced by
this algorithm is:
                           {(id), id + id, id − id, −id, id}

The average size of these samples is ss = 2.4, while the maximum size of the
shortest sample is ssm = 3.
    The other metrics are only concerned with the sequences of two terminals
(terminal pairs) that may be found in the language recognized by the grammar.



                                       S → L|L.L
                                       L → B|L B
                                       B → 0|1


Fig. 2. Grammar G2


    For instance, the grammar for Knuth’s binary numbers, described in Fig. 2,
allows 8 different terminal pairs. Combinations are presented in Table 1, where
the ﬁrst column and the ﬁrst row represent all grammar terminals (ter) and
true or false on position (teri , terj ) indicate that, there exists a sentence
recognized by this grammar which contains the pair of terminals (teri , terj ).


Table 1. Allowed terminal pairs

                                  i/j 0     1     .
                                    0 true true true
                                    1 true true true
                                    . true true false




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                   315
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


    From the table of allowed terminal pairs, we have deﬁned four different met-
rics:

 – The metrics ltps computes the number of different terminal pairs accept-
   able in the language. In case of G2 value of ltps metrics is 8.
 – The metrics ltpsm computes the maximum number of different pairs for
   one terminal. In case of G2 value of ltpsm metrics is 3, because after
   terminal 1 one can ﬁnd three different terminals (the same as in the case of
   terminal 0).
 – The metrics ltpsa computes, given a terminal, the average number of ter-
   minals that can directly follow this terminal. In case of G2 the value of ltpsa
   metrics is (3 + 3 + 2)/3 ≈ 2.666.
 – The metrics ltpsn normalizes the metrics ltps, by the number of possible
   combinations of terminals and is presented as a percentage. In the case of
   G2 the value of ltpsn, the metrics is (3 + 3 + 2)/9 ≈ 88.888%.

    Table 1 is calculated directly from the grammar by computing, for all non-
terminal X, the sets of ﬁrst F (X) = {a|X ⇒∗ aβ} and last L(X) = {a|X ⇒∗
βa} possibly derived terminals, where a is a terminal. From these sets, it is easy
to calculate pairs from the right hand sides of productions. For all occurrences
of two consecutive terminals or non-terminals v1 and v2 , one adds all of the
pairs of L(v1 )F (v2 ) where L(a) = F (a) = a in case a is a terminal.


4.    Tool Description

In this section, we present the gMetrics tool. This tool extracts information from
grammars and calculates the metrics proposed by Power and Malloy [23] as well
as the new ones, LR-based metrics and generated language-based metrics,
proposed in the previous section. The global activity diagram of gMetrics is
presented in Fig. 3.
    The main objective of this tool is to extract from input grammars as much
information as possible and perform as few modiﬁcations as possible in relation
to the original grammar. Indeed, we would like to avoid potential metric distur-
bance and to process all metrics from the same speciﬁcation.
    We currently support the formats of compiler construction tools ANTLR ver-
sion 3 [22] (an LL parser generator) and Tatoo [5] (a LR parser generator).
The metrics are divided, as explained before, into four categories: size met-
rics, structural metrics, LR automaton-based metrics and generated language-
based metrics. In practice, to reuse an existing grammar speciﬁcation, one must
take into account the grammar form (BNF, EBNF, CNF, etc.), the grammar type
(LL, LR, LALR, IELR [9], etc.), the ﬁle format (a tool mainly dependent and
potentially customized with semantics and other annotations) and the version
of the tool. In this work, we limited ourselves to grammar speciﬁcations used
by ANTLR and Tatoo. Moreover, automata-based metrics are calculated from
LR automaton, despite that a particular grammar can be of different type (e.g.,




316                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics




Fig. 3. Activity diagram



LL, LALR, IELR). Although, we report the number of shift-reduce and reduce-
reduce conﬂicts that indicate that a grammar might not be the LR grammar
(some conﬂicts are resolved by additional rules in parser generators). Our fu-
ture work lies in identifying the correct type of grammar while calculating the
automata-based metrics, as well to analyze the conﬂicts, as presented in [9].
    Nevertheless, some transformations are unavoidable because the original
input format of the grammars is different and some metrics make use of speciﬁc
algorithms that require constrained input. However, gMetrics minimizes such
transformations.
    To solve the problem of a unique grammar representation, we have chosen
to use an in-memory intermediate form close to an EBNF notation.
    Indeed, even if neither ANTLR nor Tatoo uses complete EBNF form as input,
the input format of each parser generator is close to this notation. Moreover, this
format has the advantage to avoid to choose between left of right recursion in
the speciﬁcation, since lists may be speciﬁed using star (’*’) or plus (’+’) con-
structions.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                317
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


    The ANTLR format has been selected because it provides a great deal of
interesting existing grammars and Tatoo was chosen because of its open archi-
tecture that facilitates the computation of some of the metrics. Both tools use
priorities or/and associativity rules for solving automata conﬂicts.
    In the future, we plan to broaden our tool to support other input formats (e.g.,
LISA [21]). Meanwhile, users may use this tool as a Java application library. In
this case, users need to implement the IGrammar interface, which describes
grammar in our EBNF internal form.
    Because ANTLR and Tatoo are both implemented in Java, the simplest
choice was to implement gMetrics in Java. The ﬁrst challenge was to create
and to ﬁll internal data structure from ANTLR and Tatoo grammar speciﬁcation.
More precisely, in Tatoo, we directly used the memory representation exported
by Tatoo. Moreover, since Tatoo supports grammar versioning, one input gram-
mar may include several versions (usually speciﬁed in different grammars).
    The metrics implementations are divided into four groups: size metrics, struc-
tural metrics, LR-based metrics and language-based metrics.
 – To calculate size metrics, we implement a visitor pattern that counts different
   grammar properties.
 – To compute structural metrics, the call graph is derived from the produc-
   tions. It is then used to calculate grammatical levels. The structure met-
   rics [8] are deduced from this information.
 – To construct the LR automaton, information about the grammar associative-
   ness (left or right) is ﬁrst established. Next, the LR table is computed by the
   Tatoo, engine together with the associated LR actions.
 – For the language-based metrics, terminal pairs are computed, as explained
   in the previous section.
     When dealing with metrics implementation, we try to provide as much in-
formation for interpretation as possible. For most of the metrics we provide
histograms, which are used to calculate concrete metrics values. These his-
tograms can also be used for the computation and the analysis of different sta-
tistical values.
     For example, in Fig. 4 we present the metric ltps histogram for the ANSI
C grammar. The metric ltps describes, for a given terminal, the number of
different terminals that can follow it. In this histogram one can notice that many
terminals (34 in y axle) have between 11 and 20 (x axle) terminals that can follow
them and only one terminal may be followed by almost all terminals. With this
histogram one can monitor the introduction of a new terminal in the grammar.
     The gMetrics tool is an open source project and can be found on the follow-
ing web page http://code.google.com/p/cfgmetrics.


5.    Empirical Study on Metrics for GPL and DSL Grammars
The grammar samples used for this experiment come from examples drawn
from the ANTLR [22] samples and from several versions of Java grammars for




318                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics




Fig. 4. Metrics ltps histogram for the ANSI C grammar


Tatoo [4, 5]. They cover domain-speciﬁc languages and general-purpose lan-
guages. These grammar examples are representative of current practice in
grammar-ware engineering and can be considered as good benchmarks to
evaluate the pertinence of metrics. They result from a collaborative work that
usually involves several developers thereby ensuring their global quality.
   More precisely, the DSL grammars studied are:
 – E XPR, a grammar for arithmetic expressions [2].
 – FDL, a grammar that enables the speciﬁcation of sets of features [10].
 – EBNF, a grammar for grammar speciﬁcations in Extended Backus Normal
   Form [1].
 – CFDG, a grammar of a simple programming language for generating pic-
   tures [11].
 – GAL, a grammar to describe video devices [26].
 – ANTLR V3, a grammar for grammar deﬁnitions in ANTLR version 3 for-
   mat [22].
   General-purpose language grammars studied are those from
 – Ruby 1.8.5 [27];
 – ANSI C [14];
 – Python 2.5 [19], and
 – versions of Java [12] from 1.0 to 1.6.
The version 1.6 of the Java grammar comes from ANTLR samples, whereas
the other versions come from Tatoo samples.
    The results shown in Table 2 show the outcome of the size metrics for the dif-
ferent kinds of grammars. This table indicates that some of these metrics (e.g.,




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               319
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel

Table 2. Results for classical metrics

                        Lang         term var mcc avs          hal
                        Expr               9 5 1.6      4     1
                        FDL               14 6 2.17 6.5 2.63
                        EBNF              12 7 1.71 3.29 1.17
                        CFG Design        24 13 2.39    6 6.57
                        GAL               71 74 1.2 3.88 33.36
                        ANTLR V3          49 45 2.42 4.98 29.55
                        Ruby 1.8.5        88 83 2.61 4.74 54.44
                        Java 1.6          98 110 2.46 5.96 122.66
                        ANSI C            83 66 2.21 5.09 42.34
                        Python 2.5        85 86 2.22 4.93 63.41
                        Java 1.5         102 129 1.75 5.85 140.38
                        Java 1.4         100 116 1.75 5.8 118.21
                        Java 1.3          99 114 1.76 5.84 116.85
                        Java 1.2          99 114 1.76 5.84 116.85
                        Java 1.1          98 114 1.75 5.83 116.98
                        Java 1.0          98 112 1.63 5.38 98.54




mcc, avg) can not be used to differentiate DSL from GPL grammars. Some
DSLs (e.g., GAL) are comparable to GPLs in relation to the number of termi-
nals, nonterminals, and hal indicates that the size of such DSLs grammars can
be comparable to GPLs.
     It is noteworthy that all of the metrics for Java versions are extremely stable,
with the exception of the mcc metrics, which is much larger for Java 1.6. This
is without a doubt because it is an LL grammar, designed for ANTLR, whereas
other versions of Java are LR, designed for Tatoo.
     Table 3 provides the results of the structural metrics for the grammars.
Among these results, it is interesting to note that the clev metrics indicates
that the ﬁrst versions of Java support have better modularization than the newer
versions, probably due to new constructions such as internal classes. However,
it is surprising that DSL, such as Expr, also has large values.
     Most of the structural metrics are not very relevant where they concern the
difference between DSL and GPL, with the exception of the dep metrics. How-
ever, there is marked variation between the values of this metrics between GPL,
in particular in Java. This provides a good means for the interweaving of the
grammar. From our point of view, these structural metrics are difﬁcult to under-
stand for grammar developers.
     The results of Table 4 show that the values of the metrics lrs mainly depend
on the type of the language. The DSL grammars have smaller values than GPL
grammars, below 1000 states. Second, this metrics is not directly connected to
the size of the grammar since grammars with similar numbers of terminals or
non-terminals produce completely different values (e.g. Ruby vs. Python from




320                                        ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                   On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics




Table 3. Results for structural metrics

                        Lang              timp   clev nslev vhei dep
                        Expr       56.25    60            1      3      3
                        FDL           32 83.33            1      1      2
                        EBNF       69.44 42.86            1      3      5
                        CFG Design 31.25 100              0      1      1
                        GAL         14.6 95.95            1      1      4
                        ANTLR V3 21.69 75.56              2      1      8
                        Ruby 1.8.5    62.37 37.35         1      1      53
                        Java 1.6      72.35 25.46         2      1      80
                        ANSI C        67.93 30.3          3      1      41
                        Python 2.5    44.39 46.51         3      1      35
                        Java 1.5      76.53 22.48         2      1 100
                        Java 1.4      59.59 40.52         2      1 69
                        Java 1.3      58.98 41.23         2      1 67
                        Java 1.2      58.98 41.23         2      1 67
                        Java 1.1      58.98 41.23         2      1 67
                        Java 1.0      33.29 65.18         3      1 24




Table 4. Results for LR based metrics

                    Lang               lrs        lat   lrtla lat/lrs        lcc
                    Expr               59     18        3.05   0.31           0
                    FDL               115 20.13         2.63   0.18           0
                    EBNF              129 63.08         6.36   0.49           2
                    CFG Design        151 45.72         7.57   0.32           0
                    GAL               873 40.31         3.14   0.05           1
                    ANTLR V3          958 165.92        8.66   0.17          60
                    Ruby 1.8.5     13474 3509.2 23.18          0.26 7446
                    Java 1.6        6244 1107.34 17.56         0.18 658
                    ANSI C          2512 448.04 14.98          0.18 165
                    Python 2.5      3909 646.98 14.23          0.17 57
                    Java 1.5         7741 1342.88 17.87        0.17 5715
                    Java 1.4         7183 1279.29 17.99        0.18 5715
                    Java 1.3         6698 1189.24 17.76        0.18 5144
                    Java 1.2         6698 1189.24 17.76        0.18 5144
                    Java 1.1         6693 1193.28 17.65        0.18 5144
                    Java 1.0         5611 901.02 15.9          0.16 5144




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                    321
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


Table 2). However, the evolution of this metrics is also directly connected to
the complexity of the different versions of Java, but varies smoothly. Finally, the
metrics value for the Java 1.6 grammar is not comparable to Java 1.5 grammar
value, even if the language is the same. This is due to the fact that Java 1.6
grammar is designed for LL parsing and LL grammars are known to be more
complex than LR ones. It is also probably due to a important use of conﬂict
resolution mechanism in the Java 1.5 version (measured by the lcc metrics)
that simpliﬁes the grammar. From this result, it would appear that the metrics
lrs is a good measure of the complexity of the grammar.
    For each terminal in the grammar the lat metrics sums, the number of
states in the LR automaton that does not lead to an error when this terminal is
in the lookahead, and it is normalized by the number of terminals. Because lat
metrics depends on the number of states, it is also interesting to normalize it by
the number of states (lrs).
    Indeed, the value for different versions of Java is very stable. It is also com-
parable to C, Java and Python grammar values. On the contrary, the value for
the language GAL is very low. A low value for this metrics indicates that each
terminal only appears in few of the grammar’s states (5% of the states for GAL)
and thus that the language is very controlled and probably easy to learn. On
the other hand, a high value for this metrics, such as 49% for EBNF, indicates
that the language may accept any terminal in approximately every state.
    The results show that the metrics lrtla is closely related to the type of lan-
guage. DSL grammars have smaller values than GPL grammars. Normalizing
this metrics by the number of terminals in the grammar, it produces the same
results as the normalized value of lat. This is to be expected since those two
normalized metrics compute respectively the probability of being able to shift a
given terminal in a given state and the probability of a given state to be able to
shift a given terminal.
    Results for the metrics lcc indicate that for most of the tested DSLs we
do not have a LR conﬂict. Priorities/associativities are expressed in a recursive
manner. If we compare ANTLR grammar for Java 1.6 and Tatoo grammar for
Java 1.5, we can notice big difference in metrics lcc value. Value of Tatoo
Java grammars for metrics lcc is high, because priorities/associativities are
massively used in expressions.
    In Table 5, the metrics ss provides results that are not related to the size
of the grammar nor to the expressive power of the language. GPL and DSL
grammars have similar values as well. This metrics evolves moderately with the
different versions of Java. It seems to measure the verbosity of the grammar.
Indeed, C or Python are known to be less verbose than Java. One surprising
result is again, the smaller value of this metrics for the 1.6 version of Java. This
is probably due to the larger number of productions for the LL version. Although
these complementary productions have small sample sizes, the average value
is smaller.
    The ltps, lptsm and ltpsa metrics are directly related to the type of lan-
guage. DSL have values below 1000, whereas GPL have values above 1000.




322                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics

Table 5. Results for language based metrics

                    Lang           ss ssm     ltps ltpsm ltpsa ltpsn
                    Expr       1.56      4 35         6 4.29 0.43
                    FDL        2.53      6 47         8 4.34 0.23
                    EBNF       1.59      3 102       11 5.56 0.70
                    CFG Design 2.33      7 82        17 12.72 0.14
                    GAL        2.73     13 349       43 35.34 0.06
                    ANTLR V3 1.73        8 435       29 24.97 0.18
                    Ruby 1.8.5   1.47    7 3200      88 44.87 0.41
                    Java 1.6     2.04   10 2691      92 48.61 0.28
                    ANSI C       1.73    7 1777      81 41.92 0.25
                    Python 2.5   1.73    8 1576      61 48.33 0.21
                    Java 1.5     2.98   14 2370      83 50.06 0.22
                    Java 1.4     2.94   14 2272      81 49.78 0.22
                    Java 1.3     2.95   14 2239      80 49.25 0.22
                    Java 1.2     2.95   14 2239      80 49.25 0.22
                    Java 1.1     2.96   14 2200      79 48.81 0.22
                    Java 1.0     2.89   14 1734      78 48.77 0.18



They increase smoothly with the version of Java. The ltpsn value is very com-
parable to lat/lrs, since it measures the constraints on the language. The
only language that gives different results is CDFG: the ltpsn stresses that the
language is moderately constrained (14%) whereas the other metrics indicates
30%, which is quite high. Since, these two metrics are not exactly related, it is
normal, that they produce different results, although large differences probably
indicate an interesting property of the grammar. At this time we are not able to
explain this behavior.

6.   Usage Guidelines
There is currently no empirical study for grammar based metrics, which would
ascertain or suggest when and how to use them. But from an in-depth under-
standing of metric design, we can give some useful usage guidelines. To do this
we describe the advantages/disadvantages for each proposed metrics.
   Metrics can be used for different purposes and in different stages of the
grammar/language development life-cycle. The importance of metrics and their
resulting interpretation is also dependent on their purpose. This is why it is
important to identify the objective of the use. Three usages of proposed metrics
are discussed in detail below.

Grammar-based Language Comparison
This is most common scenario in which we have different grammars and would
like to compare them. First, we need to be aware that the same language can




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                              323
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


be described with different grammars, and a grammar can be described with
different forms, or it can be specialized for different parsing techniques. The best
way to compare grammars is to compare grammars that are in the same form
and that they use the same parsing technique. In this case, the simplest metrics
to use are lrs, lat and ltpsm. These metrics indicate the size and complexity
of grammars and because of that, they can be used to rank the grammars. For a
precise comparison with common languages we suggest using the results from
Table 4 and Table 5. For quick reference of grammar size and complexity we
propose four different groups.

 – Tiny, mainly toy grammars,
 – Small, mainly DSL grammars,
 – Intermediate, 3rd generation GPL languages grammar,
 – Big, modern object-oriented language grammars.

   The groups are deﬁned using an analysis of tested grammars. The intent of
these groups is not to classify grammars by size or complexity, but merely for
quick reference in order to have a ﬁrst impression about the grammar size.


Table 6. Metrics orientation values

                  Grammar size          lrs               lat           ltpsm
                                 from         to   from         to   from to
                  Tiny             0   100    0   20   0    6
                  Small           101 1000 21 200      7   50
                  Intermediate   1001 3000 201 500 51 70
                  Big            3001 ≥ 3001 501 ≥ 501 71 ≥ 71




    Orientation values for each group and metrics are stated in Table 6.
    Metrics that are less size-dependent are lrtla and lrpsa. lrtla indi-
cates average complexity of each state and lrpsa indicates complexity of ter-
minal pairs. In the third group we ﬁnd metrics and normalizations that are not
size-dependent lat/lrs, lcc, ss and ltpsn. In most cases these values are
averaged by size. Because of this, they are less adapted to comparing larger
grammars.


Developing a New Language

In this scenario, we develop a new language from scratch. In practice, this
means that in most cases we develop new DSL (because they are most com-
mon [16, 24]). In order to compare the new language with others, we can use
metrics as suggested in the previous section. In addition, the developer can
monitor metrics after every incremental developing stage to evaluate its inﬂu-
ence on the complexity and the verbosity of grammars. For this purpose, all of




324                                       ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


the suggested metrics are appropriate, but if the developer wants to measure
the verbosity of the language, he/she should look at the lat/lrs, ss or lptsn
metrics, whereas, if the developer is interested in the complexity of the gram-
mar he/she should look at other metrics. For developers it is also interesting to
monitor number of conﬂicts lcc.


Sample Based Language Comparison

In this case, languages are compared based on samples/sentences. Two sce-
narios are possible: either formal grammar does not exist yet or a sample-based
comparison is carried out in addition to a grammar-based comparison. To be
able to compare or evaluate the language, we calculate the metrics ltpsm,
ltpsa and ltpsn (ltpX). These metrics can be calculated directly from sam-
ples, with the condition that samples involved all allow combinations of termi-
nals. In this scenario, there are two main problems. First, to identify all terminals
and second to get some degree of conﬁdence that our set of samples (S) is
diverse enough. The ﬁrst problem is lexically-related and solvable. The second
problem can neither be tested nor computed. To overcome this obstacle, we use
the relation between metrics with the unknown grammar G and metrics calcu-
lated from samples S. Value of ltpX(G) is always greater or equal to ltpX(S).
In practice this means that we can compare the language to a language that
has smaller metrics values. If our goal is to infer grammar from samples, met-
rics ltpsn can help to evaluate a number of different non-terminals. Higher
numbers mean fewer constraints in terms of language; this usually means less
differing non-terminals. With this information we have more direct grammar in-
ference search [6, 7].


7.   Conclusion and Future Work

This paper explores the usefulness of several new metrics for grammar engi-
neering. It presents experimental results for traditional metrics and for these
new metrics on several grammars. These grammars cover domain-speciﬁc lan-
guages and general-purpose languages. Existing metrics are directly computed
from the grammar itself. A ﬁrst set of new metrics uses the LR automaton pro-
duced from the grammar. A second is related to the language recognized. We
believe that these metrics provide interesting results that are not all covered by
existing metrics. From this point of view, LR-based metrics are probably more
suitable for grammar experts familiar with LR parsing, whereas other metrics
could also be applicable for non-specialists in grammar development.
    From experimental results, we see that some metrics are directly linked to
the size or the complexity of the grammar whereas others remain stable even if
the size or complexity of the grammar varies. Our ﬁndings show that the metrics
in both cases qualify for evaluating the quality of the grammar. However, we
consider that the quality of the grammar cannot be captured by a single metrics




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                  325
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


but by a range of the metrics explored in this paper. Moreover, this quality is not
an absolute value but is relative to other grammars.
    In this paper we only explore the metrics of the grammar portion of the
analyzer, without looking at the lexing portion of the analyzer. However, the
complexity of these two parts is closely related. For instance, one could specify
in the lexer a different token for true and false or establish a generic token for
the booleans. In this case, the grammar would necessarily be different and may
produce different metrics. Therefore, we believe that metrics on token deﬁnitions
could also be useful to capture the entire complexity of a language analyzer. An
analyzer with complex lexer and simpler parser may be less maintainable than
a complex parser with a simple lexer.


References
 1. International standard EBNF syntax notation. ISO/IEC standard n◦ 14977 (1996)
 2. Aho, A., Lam, M., Sethi, R., Ullman, J.: Compiler: Principles, Techniques, and Tools.
    Addison Wesley, 2nd edn. (2007)
 3. Alves, T.L., Visser, J.: A case study in grammar engineering. In: Proceedings of the
    1st International Conference on Software Language Engineering (SLE 2008). pp.
    285–304. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series, Springer Verlag (2008)
 4. Cervelle, J., Forax, R., Roussel, G.: Tatoo: An innovative parser generator. In: 4th
    International Conference on Programming Principal and Practice in Java (PPPJ’06).
    pp. 13–20. ACM International Conference Proceedings, Mannheim, Germany (Aug
    2006)
 5. Cervelle, J., Forax, R., Roussel, G.: A simple implementation of grammar libraries.
    Computer Science and Information Systems 4(2), 65–77 (2007)
 6. Črepinšek, M., Mernik, M., Javed, F., Bryant, B.R., Sprague, A.P.: Extracting gram-
    mar from programs: evolutionary approach. SIGPLAN Notices 40(4), 39–46 (2005)
 7. Črepinšek, M., Mernik, M., Žumer, V.: Extracting grammar from programs: brute
    force approach. SIGPLAN Notices 40(4), 29–38 (2005)
 8. Csuhaj-Varjú, E., Kelemenová, A.: Descriptional complexity of context-free grammar
    forms. Theoretical Computer Science 112(2), 277–289 (May 1993)
 9. Denny, J.E., Malloy, B.A.: The ielr(1) algorithm for generating minimal lr(1) parser
    tables for non-lr(1) grammars with conﬂict resolution. Science of Computer Pro-
    gramming (September 2009), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2009.08.001
10. Deursen, A. van., Klint, P.: Domain-speciﬁc language design requires feature de-
    scriptions. Journal of Computing and Information Technology 10(1), 1–17 (2002)
11. Elliott, C., Finne, S., Moor, O.D.: Compiling embedded languages. In: Proceedings
    of the Workshop on Semantics, Applications, and Implementation of Program Gen-
    eration (SAIG’00). pp. 9–27. Springer-Verlag (Sep 2000)
12. Gosling, J., Joy, B., Steele, G., Bracha, G.: Java Language Speciﬁcation, Second
    Edition: The Java Series. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston,
    MA, USA (2000)
13. Halstead, M.H.: Elements of Software Science. Elsevier, New York (1977)
14. Harbison, S.P., Steele Jr, G.L.: C A Reference Manual, Fourth Edition. Prentice-Hall,
    Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458, USA (1995)
15. Heering, J., Hendriks, P.R.H., Klint, P., Rekers, J.: The syntax deﬁnition formalism
    sdf—reference manual—. SIGPLAN Not. 24(11), 43–75 (1989)




326                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                   On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


16. Javed, F., Mernik, M., Bryant, B., Sprague, A.: An unsupervised incremental learning
    algorithm for domain-speciﬁc language development. Applied Artiﬁcial Intelligence
    22(7), 707–729 (2008)
17. Klint, P., Lämmel, R., Verhoef, C.: Toward an engineering discipline for grammar-
    ware. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology 14(3), 331–380
    (2005)
18. Lämmel, R.: Grammar Testing. In: Proc. of Fundamental Approaches to Software
    Engineering (FASE) 2001. LNCS, vol. 2029, pp. 201–216. Springer-Verlag (2001)
19. Lutz, M., Ascher, D.: Learning Python, Second Edition. O’Reilly Media, Inc., Se-
    bastopol, CA (2003)
20. Mernik, M., Heering, J., Sloane, A.M.: When and how to develop domain-speciﬁc
    languages. ACM Computing Surveys 37(4), 316–344 (2005)
21. Mernik, M., Korbar, N., Žumer, V.: LISA: A tool for automatic language implementa-
    tion. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 30(4), 71–79 (Apr 1995)
22. Parr, T.J., Quong, R.W.: ANTLR: A Predicated-LL(k) Parser Generator. Software
    Practice and Experience 25(7), 789 – 810 (1995)
23. Power, J.F., Malloy, J.F.: A metrics suite for grammar-based software. Journal of
    Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and Practice 16(6), 405–426 (2004)
24. Rebernak, D., Mernik, M., Wu, H., Gray, J.G.: Domain-speciﬁc aspect languages
    for modularising crosscutting concerns in grammars. IET software 3(3), 184–200
    (2009)
25. Slivnik, B., Vilfan, B.: Producing the left parse during bottom-up parsing. Information
    Processing Letters (96), 220–224 (Dec 2005)
26. Thibault, S., Marlet, R., Consel, C.: Domain-speciﬁc languages: from design to im-
    plementation – application to video device drivers generation. IEEE Transactions on
    Software Engineering 25(3), 363–377 (May 1999)
27. Thomas, D., Fowler, C., Hunt, A.: Programming Ruby. The Pragmatic Programmer’s
    Guide. Pragmatic Programmers (2004)
28. Watt, D.A.: Programming Language Concepts and Paradigms. Prentice-Hall (1990)


Appendix
7.1.   Computation of closure application of rules
The ﬁrst two steps of the computation of the shortest sample for a production
require a same closure mechanism which is already implemented in the parser
generator Tatoo to compute the ﬁrst and the follow set [2].
    The problem this mechanism solves can be formalized in the following way:
we associate to each non-terminal X a mathematical object (a set of termi-
nals for ﬁrst and follow set, but a word in the process describe below) which
we note M[X]. The process ﬁlls the map M starting from some non-terminals
and updates it using rules until the whole map is ﬁlled. In particular, an object
associated to a non-terminal can change during the process. For instance, in
the sequel, we try to compute the shortest words; in these cases, a word can
be replaced by a shorter one.
    The problem is expressed giving two rules. The ﬁrst one, the initiation rule,
tells how to initiate the process by giving an answer for some non-terminals
and putting it in the map M. The second one, the iteration rule, gives how to




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                        327
M. Črepinšek, T. Kosar, M. Mernik, J. Cervelle, R. Forax, G. Roussel


construct new objects from others, leading to the construction of dependency
maps which store, for a non-terminal X:
 i. the non-terminals Y such that M[Y ] changes when M[X] is updated
 ii. the non-terminals Y such that M[Y ] has to be computed in order to get
     M[X].
Note that map i. is easily computed from iteration rules and map ii. is the re-
verse of map i. In order to compute the object associated to X, the solver ﬁrst
recursively uses map ii. to get all the words that have to be computed and then
uses the iteration rule in a loop until no more changes are made into the map
M.

7.2.   Computation of a shortest word generated by X
We note this map M1 .
  The rule for the computation are the following:
 – initiation rule : if X → α is a production such that α is the shortest only
   made of terminals, X generates α, M1 [X] = α.
 – iteration rule : if X → α is a production such that α does not contains X,
   then, if smaller or not yet deﬁned, M1 [X] is replaced by the word obtained
   replacing each non-terminals Y of α by M1 [Y ].
   Note that cycles in dependency map are not a problem since they always
lead to longer words.

7.3.   Computation of a shortest word leading to X
We note this map M2 .
  The rule for the computation are the following:
 – if S is an axiom, S is a shortest word leading to S, that is M2 [S] = S.
 – if X → αY β is a production, then, if smaller or not yet deﬁned, M2 [Y ]
   is replaced by the word M2 [X] where X is replaced by α Y β  , α [resp.
   β  ] being the word α [resp. β] where all non-terminals Z in this word are
   replaced by M1 [Z].
   Here again, cycles are not a problem for the same reason.


Matej Črepinšek received the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the Uni-
versity of Maribor, Slovenia in 2007. His research interests include grammatical
inference, evolutionary computations, object-oriented programming, compilers
and grammar-based systems. He is currently a teaching assistant at the Uni-
versity of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.

Tomaž Kosar received the Ph.D. degree in computer science at the University
of Maribor, Slovenia in 2007. His research is mainly concerned with design and




328                                     ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                 On Automata and Language Based Grammar Metrics


implementation of domain-speciﬁc languages. Other research interest in com-
puter science include also domain-speciﬁc visual languages, empirical software
engineering, software security, generative programming, compiler construction,
object oriented programming, object-oriented design, refactoring, and unit test-
ing. He is currently a teaching assistant at the University of Maribor, Faculty of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.

Marjan Mernik received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from
the University of Maribor in 1994 and 1998 respectively. He is currently a pro-
fessor at the University of Maribor, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science. He is also an adjunct professor at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Department of Computer and Information Sciences. His research
interests include programming languages, compilers, grammar-based systems,
grammatical inference, and evolutionary computations. He is a member of the
IEEE, ACM and EAPLS.

Julien Cervelle received the Ph. D. degree in computer science at Provence
University, Marseille, France in 2002 and its habilitation thesis at Paris-Est Uni-
versity, France in 2007. His research interest are grammar based systems,
parser generators, dynamical systems and cellular automata. He is currently
Professor at Paris-Est University, France and adjunct professor at Ecole Poly-
technique, Palaiseau, France.

Rémi Forax received the Ph. D. degree in Computer Science at Paris-Est Uni-
versity, France in 2001. He is currently a Teaching Assistant at Paris-Est Uni-
versity and a Java Community Process Expert for JSR 292. His main research
areas concern design and implementation of programming languages, compiler
construction, parser generators, virtual machines and executing environment.

Gilles Roussel received in computer science at UPMC, Paris, France in 1994
and its habilitation thesis at University of Marne-la-Vallée, France in 2003. He is
currently professor at Paris-Est University and is deputy director of LIGM com-
puter laboratory at Paris-Est University. His research interests are programming
languages parsing, object-oriented design, program plagiarism detection, net-
work programming and network routing algorithms.


Received: November 15, 2009; Accepted: March 30, 2010.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                329
UDC 004.635.3, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002331F


         Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata

                Tomáš Flouri1 , Jan Janoušek2 , and Bořivoj Melichar2
                   1
                    Department of Computer Science and Engineering
                              Faculty of Electrical Engineering
                          Czech Technical University in Prague
                   Karlovo nám. 13, 121 35 Prague 2, Czech Republic
                                flourtom@fel.cvut.cz,
                    2
                       Department of Theoretical Computer Science
                             Faculty of Information Technology
                          Czech Technical University in Prague
                    Kolejnı́ 550/2, 160 00 Prague 6, Czech Republic
                {Jan.Janousek,Borivoj.Melichar}@fit.cvut.cz


         Abstract. Subtree matching is an important problem in Computer Sci-
         ence on which a number of tasks, such as mechanical theorem prov-
         ing, term-rewriting, symbolic computation and nonprocedural program-
         ming languages are based on. A systematic approach to the construction
         of subtree pattern matchers by deterministic pushdown automata, which
         read subject trees in prefix and postfix notation, is presented. The method
         is analogous to the construction of string pattern matchers: for a given
         pattern, a nondeterministic pushdown automaton is created and is then
         determinised. In addition, it is shown that the size of the resulting deter-
         ministic pushdown automata directly corresponds to the size of the exist-
         ing string pattern matchers based on finite automata.
         Keywords: subtree, subtree matching, pushdown automata.


1.     Introduction
The theory of formal string (or word) languages [2, 16, 24] and the theory of
formal tree languages [6, 8, 14] are important parts of the theory of formal lan-
guages [23]. While the models of computation of the theory of string languages
are finite automata, pushdown automata, linear bounded automata and Turing
machines, the most famous models of computation of the theory of tree lan-
guages are various kinds of tree automata [6, 8, 14]. Trees, however, can also
be seen as strings, for example in their prefix (also called preorder) or postfix
(also called postorder) notation. Recently it has been shown that the determin-
istic pushdown automaton (PDA) is an appropriate model of computation for
labelled, ordered, ranked trees in postfix notation and that the trees in post-
fix notation, acceptable by deterministic PDA, form a proper superclass of the
class of regular tree languages, which are accepted by finite tree automata [18].

     This research has been partially supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and
     Sports under research program MSM 6840770014, and by the Czech Science Foun-
     dation as project No. 201/09/0807.
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


     Trees represent one of the fundamental data structures used in Computer
Science and thus tree pattern matching, the process of finding occurrences
of subtrees in trees, is an important problem with many applications, such as
compiler code selection, interpretation of non-procedural languages or various
tree finding and tree replacement systems.
     Tree pattern matching is often declared to be analogous to the problem of
string pattern matching [6]. One of the basic approaches used for string pattern
matching can be represented by finite automata constructed for the pattern,
which means that the pattern is preprocessed. Examples of these automata
are the string matching automata [9, 10, 22, 26]. Given a pattern P of size m,
the string matching automaton can be constructed for the pattern P in time lin-
ear to m. The constructed string matching automaton accepts the set of words
containing pattern P as a suffix, and thus it can find all occurrences of string
P in a given text T . The main advantage of this kind of finite automata is that
the deterministic string matching automaton can be constructed in time linear to
the size of the given pattern P , and the search phase is in time linear to the in-
put text. A generalization of the mentioned string matching problem can be the
string matching problem with multiple patterns [1, 22, 26]. Given a set of pat-
terns P = {p1 , p2 , . . . , pm }, the string matching automaton can be constructed
in time linear to the number of symbols of patterns in set P . The constructed
string matching automaton accepts the set of words having any of the patterns
in P as a suffix, and thus it can find all occurrences of strings p1 , . . . , pm in a
given text T .
     Although there are many tree pattern matching methods (see [5–7, 11, 15,
25] for these methods), they fail to present a simple and systematic approach
with a linear time searching phase which would also be directly analogous to
the basic string pattern matching method.
     This paper, being an extended version of [12], presents a new kind of PDAs
for trees in prefix and postfix notations called subtree matching PDAs, which are
directly analogous to string matching automata and their properties. A subtree
matching PDA, constructed from a given tree s, can find all occurrences of
subtree s within a given tree t in time O(n), where n is the number of nodes of t.
Subtree matching, as with string matching, can also be generalized to subtree
matching with multiple patterns. Subtree matching PDAs can be constructed
from a set of trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } in the same manner as string matching
automata, retaining their property of linear searching phase O(n), where n is
the number of nodes of the subject tree t.
     Moreover, the presented subtree matching PDAs have the following two
other properties. First, they are input–driven PDAs [28], which means that each
pushdown operation is determined only by the input symbol. The input–driven
PDAs can be always determinised [28]. Second, their pushdown symbol alpha-
bets contain just one pushdown symbol and therefore their pushdown store can
be implemented by a single integer counter. This means that the presented
PDAs can be transformed to counter automata [4, 27], which is a weaker and
simpler model of computation than the PDA.




332                                      ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                   Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


    The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Basic definitions are given in
section 2. Some properties of subtrees in prefix notation are discussed in the
third section. Sections 4 and 5 deal with the subtree matching PDA constructed
over a single and multiple patterns, respectively. Section 6 shows the dual prin-
ciple for the postfix notation and the last section is the conclusion.


2.     Basic Notions

2.1.   Ranked alphabet, tree, prefix notation, postfix notation, subtree
       matching

We define notions on trees similarly as they are defined in [2, 6, 8, 14].
    We denote the set of natural numbers by N. A ranked alphabet is a finite,
nonempty set of symbols, each of which has a unique nonnegative arity (or
rank). Given a ranked alphabet A, the arity of a symbol a ∈ A is denoted by
Arity(a). The set of symbols of arity p is denoted by Ap . Elements of arity
0, 1, 2, . . . , p are respectively called nullary (constants), unary, binary, . . . , p-ary
symbols. We assume that A contains at least one constant. In the examples
we use numbers at the end of identifiers for a short declaration of symbols with
arity. For instance, a2 is a short declaration of a binary symbol a.
    Based on concepts from graph theory (see [2]), a labelled, ordered, ranked
tree over a ranked alphabet A can be defined as follows:
    An ordered directed graph G is a pair (N, R), where N is a set of nodes
and R is a set of linearly ordered lists of edges such that each element of R is
of the form ((f, g1 ), (f, g2 ), . . . , (f, gn )), where f, g1 , g2 , . . . , gn ∈ N , n ≥ 0. This
element would indicate that, for node f , there are n edges leaving f , the first
entering node g1 , the second entering node g2 , and so forth.
    A sequence of nodes (f0 , f1 , . . . , fn ), n ≥ 1, is a path of length n from node
f0 to node fn if there is an edge which leaves node fi−1 and enters node fi for
1 ≤ i ≤ n. A cycle is a path (f0 , f1 , . . . , fn ), where f0 = fn . An ordered dag
(dag stands for Directed Acyclic Graph) is an ordered directed graph that has
no cycle. Labelling of an ordered graph G = (A, R) is a mapping of A into a set
of labels. In the examples we use af for a short declaration of node f , labelled
by symbol a.
    Given a node f , its out-degree is the number of distinct pairs (f, g) ∈ R,
where g ∈ A. By analogy, in-degree of node f is the number of distinct pairs
(g, f ) ∈ R, where g ∈ A.
    A labelled, ordered, ranked and rooted tree t over a ranked alphabet A is an
ordered dag t = (N, R) with a special node r ∈ A called the root such that
(1) r has in-degree 0,
(2) all other nodes of t have in-degree 1,
(3) there is just one path from the root r to every f ∈ N , where f = r,
(4) every node f ∈ N is labelled by a symbol a ∈ A and out-degree of af is
Arity(a).
    Nodes labelled by nullary symbols (constants) are called leaves.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                               333
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


    Prefix notation pref(t) of a labelled, ordered, ranked and rooted tree t is
obtained by applying the following Step recursively, beginning at the root of t:
Step: Let this application of Step be node af . If af is a leaf, list a and halt.
If af is not a leaf, having direct descendants af1 , af2 , . . . , afn , then list a and
subsequently apply Step to af1 , af2 , . . . , afn in that order.
Postfix notation post(t) of t is formed by changing the last sentence of Step to
read “Apply Step to af1 , af2 , . . . , afn in that order and then list a.”
Example 1. Consider a tree t1 = ( {a21 , a22 , a03 , a14 , a05 , a16 , a07 }, R ) over
A = {a2, a1, a0} , where R is a set of the following ordered sequences of pairs:
                                  ((a21 , a22 ), (a21 , a16 )),
                                  ((a22 , a03 ), (a22 , a14 )),
                                  ((a14 , a05 )),
                                  ((a16 , a07 ))
   The prefix and postfix notations of tree t1 are strings pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1
a0 a1 a0 and post(t1 ) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2, respectively. Trees can be repre-
sented graphically, and tree t1 is illustrated in Fig. 1.                        
                                                                                 


                                              a21


                                      a22             a16


                            a03               a14     a07


                                              a05



                              pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0


Fig. 1. Tree t1 from Example 1 and its prefix notation




    The number of nodes of a tree t is denoted by |t|.
    The height of a tree t, denoted by Height(t), is defined as the maximal length
of a path from the root of t to a leaf of t.
    A subtree p matches an object tree t at node n if p is equal to the subtree of
t rooted at n.

2.2.   Alphabet, language, pushdown automaton
We define notions from the theory of string languages similarly as they are
defined in [2, 16].




334                                         ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                               Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


     Let an alphabet be a finite nonempty set of symbols. A string x over a given
alphabet is a finite, possibly empty sequence of symbols. A language over an
alphabet A is a set of strings over A. Set A∗ denotes the set of all strings over
A including the empty string, denoted by ε. Set A+ is defined as A+ = A∗ \ {ε}.
Similarly for string x ∈ A∗ , xm , m ≥ 0, denotes the m-fold concatenation of x
with x0 = ε. Set x∗ is defined as x∗ = {xm : m ≥ 0} and x+ = x∗ \ {ε} = {xm :
m ≥ 1}.
     An (extended) nondeterministic pushdown automaton (nondeterministic
PDA) is a seven-tuple M = (Q, A, G, δ, q0 , Z0 , F ), where Q is a finite set of
states, A is the input alphabet, G is the pushdown store alphabet, δ is a map-
ping from Q × (A ∪ {ε}) × G∗ into a set of finite subsets of Q × G∗ , q0 ∈ Q is the
initial state, Z0 ∈ G is the initial content of the pushdown store, and F ⊆ Q is
the set of final (accepting) states. The triplet (q, w, x) ∈ Q × A∗ × G∗ denotes the
configuration of a pushdown automaton. In this paper we will write the top of the
pushdown store x on its left hand side. The initial configuration of a pushdown
automaton is a triplet (q0 , w, Z0 ) for the input string w ∈ A∗ .
     The relation M ⊂ (Q × A∗ × G∗ ) × (Q × A∗ × G∗ ) is a transition of a push-
down automaton M . It holds that (q, aw, αβ) M (p, w, γβ) if (p, γ) ∈ δ(q, a, α).
The k-th power, transitive closure, and transitive and reflexive closure of the re-
lation M is denoted kM , +          ∗
                              M , M , respectively. A pushdown automaton M is a
deterministic pushdown automaton (deterministic PDA), if it holds:
1. |δ(q, a, γ)| ≤ 1 for all q ∈ Q, a ∈ A ∪ {ε}, γ ∈ G∗ .
2. If δ(q, a, α) = ∅, δ(q, a, β) = ∅ and α = β then α is not a suffix of β and β is
   not a suffix of α.
3. If δ(q, a, α) = ∅, δ(q, ε, β) = ∅, then α is not a suffix of β and β is not a suffix
   of α.
    A pushdown automaton is input–driven if its each pushdown operation is
determined only by the input symbol.
A language L accepted by a pushdown automaton M is defined in two distinct
ways:
1. Accepting by final state:
                                       ∗                  ∗       ∗
         L(M ) = {x : δ(q0 , x, Z0 )   M (q, ε, γ) ∧ x ∈ A ∧ γ ∈ G ∧ q ∈ F }.

2. Accepting by empty pushdown store:
                                              ∗                  ∗
               Lε (M ) = {x : (q0 , x, Z0 )   M (q, ε, ε) ∧ x ∈ A ∧ q ∈ Q}.

    If a PDA accepts the language by empty pushdown store then the set F of
final states may be the empty set. The subtree PDAs accept the languages by
empty pushdown store.
    In the rest of the text, we use the following notation for labelling edges
when illustrating transition diagrams of various PDAs: For each transition rule
δ1 (p, a, α) = (q, β) from the transition mapping δ of a PDA, we label its edge
leading from state p to state q by the triplet of the form a|α → β.
    For more details on pushdown automata see [2, 16].




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                      335
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


                                                                                      a2
                                                                           a2
                                                                a2
                                                     a2
     a0, a1
                                          a2
                                                a2
              a2   [0, 1]
                            a2    [0, 1, 2]
                                               a0     [0, 3]
                                                                 a1       [0, 4]
                                                                                   a0      [0, 5]
                                                                                                    a1   [0, 6]
                                                                                                                  a0   [0, 7]
       [0]

              a1, a0
                       a1
                                 a0
                                              a1
                                                          a0
                                                                     a1
                                                                             a1, a0




Fig. 2. Transition diagram of deterministic string matching automaton for pattern x =
a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 from Example 2


2.3.     Examples of string matching automaton

Example 2. The transition diagram of the deterministic string matching automa-
ton constructed for string a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 is illustrated in Fig. 2.   
                                                                            

Example 3. The transition diagram of the deterministic string matching automa-
ton constructed for a set of strings P = {a2 a2 a0 a0 b0, a2 b1 a0 a0, a2 a0 a0} is
illustrated in Fig. 3.                                                           
                                                                                 

   See [2, 9, 22] for definitions of finite automata and construction of the deter-
ministic string matching automaton.


3.     Properties of subtrees in prefix notation

In this section we describe some general properties of the prefix notation of a
tree and of its subtrees. These properties are important for the construction of
the subtree matching PDA, which is described in the next two sections.
Example 4. Consider tree t1 in prefix notation pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0
from Example 1, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. Tree t1 contains only subtrees
shown in Fig. 4.
     Generally, for any tree, the following theorem holds.

Theorem 1. Given a tree t and its prefix notation pref(t), all subtrees of t in
prefix notation are substrings of pref(t).

Proof. By induction on the height of the subtree.




336                                                            ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                               Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata




                                                                                                                          a0, b0, b1
                                                                a2                                   a0, b1
                                                                              b0, b1
                                    b0
                                                               0, 1, 2
                                                                          a0            0, 3, 9
                                                                                                         a0    0, 4, 10
                                                                                                                            b0          0, 5

 a0, b0, b1                              a2
                                                                   b1           a2                       a2                a2
                 b0
     0                0, 1
              a2
                                              b1
                      a0                                                               a2                           a2
                                               a2                             a0                               a0
                                                               0, 6                               0, 7                           0, 8

                                                    b0, b1
                                                                                b0, b1
                                                                                                              a0, b0, b1
         a0, b0, b1        b0, b1
                                                      a2                               a2

                                                        0, 9
                                                                         a0            0, 10




Fig. 3. Transition diagram of deterministic string matching automaton (Aho-Corasick) for
patterns {a2 a2 a0 a0 b0, a2 b1 a0 a0, a2 a0 a0}



1. If a subtree t has just one node a, where Arity(a) = 0, then Height(t ) = 0,
   pref(t ) = a and the claim holds for that subtree.
2. Assume that the claim holds for subtrees t1 , t2 , . . . , tp , where p ≥ 1 and
   Height(t1 ) ≤ m, Height(t2 ) ≤ m, . . ., Height(tp ) ≤ m, m ≥ 0. We have
   to prove that the claim holds also for each subtree t = at1 t2 . . . tp , where
   Arity(a) = p and Height(t ) = m + 1:
   As pref(t ) = a pref(t1 ) pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tp ), the claim holds for the subtree
   t .

Thus, the theorem holds.                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                         

   However, not every substring of a tree in prefix notation is its subtree in
prefix notation. This can be easily seen on the fact that for a given tree with n
nodes in prefix notation, there can be O(n2 ) distinct substrings but there is just
n subtrees – each node of the tree is the root of just one subtree. Just those
substrings which themselves are trees in prefix notation are those which are the
subtrees in prefix notation. This property is formalised by the following definition
and theorem.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                                                         337
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


                  a2


           a2            a1                 a2


      a0          a1     a0          a0             a1          a1


                  a0                                a0          a0            a0

pref(t) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0    pref(t) = a2 a0 a1 a0    pref(t) = a1 a0   pref(t) = a0
post(t) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2    post(t) = a0 a0 a1 a2    post(t) = a0 a1   post(t) = a0

Fig. 4. All subtrees of tree t1 from Example 1, and their prefix and postfix notations



Definition 1. Let w = a1 a2 . . . am , m ≥ 1, be a string over a ranked alphabet A.
Then, the arity checksum ac(w) = Arity(a1 )+Arity(a2 )+. . .+Arity(am )−m+1=
 m
  i=1 Arity(ai ) − m + 1.

Theorem 2. Let pref(t) and w be a tree t in prefix notation and a substring of
pref(t), respectively. Then, w is the prefix notation of a subtree of t, if and only
if ac(w) = 0, and ac(w1 ) ≥ 1 for each w1 , where w = w1 x, x = ε.

Proof. It is easy to see that for any two subtrees st1 and st2 it holds that pref(st1 )
and pref(st2 ) are either two different strings or one is a substring of the other.
The former case occurs if the subtrees st1 and st2 are two different trees with
no shared part and the latter case occurs if one tree is a subtree of the other
tree. No partial overlapping of subtrees is possible in ranked ordered trees.
Moreover, for any two neighbouring subtrees it holds that their prefix notations
are two adjacent substrings.

 – If: By induction on the height of a subtree st, where w = pref(st):
    1. We assume that Heigth(st) = 1, which means we consider the case
        w = a, where Arity(a) = 0. Then, ac(w) = 0. Thus, the claim holds for
        the case Height(st) = 1.
    2. Assume that the claim holds for the subtrees st1 , st2 , . . . , stp where
        p ≥ 1, Height(st1 ) ≤ m, Height(st2 ) ≤ m, . . ., Height(stp ) ≤ m and
        ac(pref(st1 )) = 0, ac(pref(st2 )) = 0, . . ., ac(pref(stp )) = 0.
        We are to prove that it holds also for a subtree of height m + 1. Assume
        w = a pref(st1 ) pref(st2 ) . . . pref(stp ), where Arity(a) = p. Then
        ac(w) = p+ac(pref(st1 ))+ac(pref(st2 ))+. . .+ac(pref(stp ))−(p+1)+1 =
        0 and ac(w1 ) ≥ 1 for each w1 , where w = w1 x, x = ε.
        Thus, the claim holds for the case Height(st) = m + 1.
 – Only if : Assume ac(w) = 0, and w = a1 a2 . . . ak , where k ≥ 1, Arity(a1 ) = p.
   Since ac(w1 ) ≥ 1 for each w1 , where w = w1 x, x = ε, none of the substrings
   w1 can be a subtree in prefix notation. This means that the only possibility




338                                       ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                             Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


     for ac(w) = 0 is that w is of the form w = a pref(t1 ) pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tp ),
     where p ≥ 0, and t1 , t2 . . . tp are neighbouring subtrees. In such case,
     ac(w) = p + 0 − (p + 1) + 1 = 0.
     No other possibility of the form of w for ac(w) = 0 is possible. Thus, the
     claim holds.

     Thus, the theorem holds.                                                        
                                                                                     

   We note that in subtree matching PDAs, the arity checksum is computed by
pushdown operations, where the contents of the pushdown store represents the
corresponding arity checksum. For example, the empty pushdown store means
that the corresponding arity checksum is equal to 0.


4.    Subtree Matching pushdown automaton

This section deals with the subtree matching PDA for trees in prefix notation:
algorithms and theorems are given and the subtree matching PDA and its con-
struction are demonstrated with an example.

Problem 1 (Subtree Matching). Given two trees s and t, find all occurrences of
tree s in tree t.

Definition 2. Let s and pref(s) be a tree and its prefix notation, respectively.
Given an input tree t, a subtree pushdown automaton constructed over pref(s)
accepts all matches of tree s in the input tree t by final state.

    First, we start with a PDA which accepts the whole subject tree in prefix
notation. The construction of the PDA accepting a tree in prefix notation is de-
scribed by Alg. 1. The constructed PDA is deterministic.


Algorithm 1. Construction of a PDA accepting a tree t in prefix notation pref(t).
Input: A tree t over a ranked alphabet A; prefix notation pref(t) = a1 a2 . . . an ,
n ≥ 1.
Output: PDA Mp (t) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, {n}).
Method:

1. For each state i, where 1 ≤ i ≤ n, create a new transition δ(i − 1, ai , S) =
   (i, S Arity(ai ) ), where S 0 = ε.                                          
                                                                               


Example 5. The PDA constructed by Alg. 1, accepting the prefix notation
pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 of tree t1 from Example 1, is the deterministic
PDA Mp (t1 ) = ({0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, A, {S}, δ1, 0, S, {n})), where the mapping δ1
is a set of the following transitions:




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                    339
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


          a2|S → SS       a2|S → SS       a0|S → ε        a1|S → S       a0|S → ε       a1|S → S       a0|S → ε
      0                1                2               3                4               5               6               7




Fig. 5. Transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mp (t1 ) accepting tree t1 in prefix notation
pref(t1 ) = a2 a0 a2 a0 a0 a0 from Example 5


                                              δ1 (0, a2, S) = (1, SS)
                                              δ1 (1, a2, S) = (2, SS)
                                              δ1 (2, a0, S) = (3, ε)
                                              δ1 (3, a1, S) = (4, S)
                                              δ1 (4, a0, S) = (5, ε)
                                              δ1 (5, a1, S) = (6, S)
                                              δ1 (6, a0, S) = (7, ε)


   The transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mp (t1 ) is illustrated in Fig. 5.
Fig. 6 shows the sequence of transitions (trace) performed by deterministic PDA
Mp (t1 ) for tree t1 in prefix notation.                                       
                                                                               


                               State        Input         Pushdown Store
                              0      a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0              S
                              1      a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0              SS
                              2      a0 a1 a0 a1 a0               SSS
                              3      a1 a0 a1 a0                    SS
                              4      a0 a1 a0                       SS
                              5      a1 a0                             S
                              6      a0                                S
                              7      ε                                 ε
                              accept


Fig. 6. Trace of deterministic PDA Mp (t1 ) from Example 5 for tree t1 in prefix notation
pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0



Theorem 3. Let M = ({Q, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ) be an input–driven PDA whose
each transition from δ is of the form δ(q1 , a, S) = (q2 , S i ), where i = Arity(a).
Then, if (q3 , w, S) +
                     M (q4 , ε, S ), then j = ac(w).
                                 j


Proof. By induction on the length of w:
1. Assume w = a. Then, (q3 , a, S) M (q4 , ε, S j ), where j = Arity(a) = ac(a).
   Thus, the claim holds for the case w = a.
2. Assume that the claim holds for a string w = a1 a2 . . . ak , where k ≥ 1. This
   means that (q3 , a1 a2 . . . ak , S) kM (q4 , ε, S j ), where j = ac(a1 a2 . . . ak ). We
   have to prove that the claim holds also for w = a1 a2 . . . ak a.




340                                                         ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                              Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


    It holds that (q3 , a1 a2 . . . ak a, S) kM (q4 , a, S j ) M (q5 , ε, S l ), where l =
    j +Arity(a)−1 = ac(w)+Arity(a)−1 = Arity(a1 )+Arity(a2 )+. . .+Arity(ak )−
    k + 1 + Arity(a) − 1 = ac(a1 a2 . . . ak a).
    Thus, the claim holds for the case w = a1 a2 . . . ak a.
   Thus, the theorem holds.                                                             
                                                                                        

   The correctness of the deterministic PDA constructed by Alg. 1, which ac-
cepts trees in prefix notation, is described by the following lemma.

Lemma 1. Given a tree t and its prefix notation pref(t), the PDA Mp (t) =
({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ), where n = |t|, constructed by Alg. 1, accepts
pref(t).

Proof. By induction on the height of the tree t:
1. If tree t has just one node a, where Arity(a) = 0, then Height(t) = 0,
   pref(t) = a, δ(0, a, S) = (1, ε) ∈ δ, (0, a, S) Mp (t) (1, ε, ε) and the claim
   holds for that tree.
2. Assume that claim holds for trees t1 , t2 , . . . , tp , where p ≥ 1, Height(t1 ) ≤ m,
   Height(t2 ) ≤ m, . . ., Height(tp ) ≤ m, m ≥ 0.
   We have to prove that the claim holds also for each tree t such that
   pref(t) = a pref(t1 )pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tp ), Arity(a) = p, and Height(t) ≥ m + 1:
   Since δ(0, a, S) = (1, S p ) ∈ δ, and (0, a pref(t1 )pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tp ), S)
     Mp (t) (1, pref(t1 )pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tp ), S )
                                                       p
     ∗
     Mp (t) (i,   pref(t 2 ) . . . pref(t p ), S p−1
                                                     )
     ∗
     Mp (t) . . .
     ∗
     Mp (t) (j, pref(tp ), S)
     ∗
     Mp (t) (k, ε, ε),
   the claim holds for that tree.
Thus, the lemma holds.                                                                  
                                                                                        

    We present the construction of the deterministic subtree matching PDA for
trees in prefix notation. The construction consists of two steps. First, a nondeter-
ministic subtree matching PDA is constructed by Alg. 2. This nondeterministic
subtree matching PDA is an extension of the PDA accepting trees in prefix nota-
tion, which is constructed by Alg. 1. Second, the constructed nondeterministic
subtree matching PDA is transformed to the equivalent deterministic subtree
matching PDA. In spite of the fact that the determinisation of a nondeterministic
PDA is not possible generally, the constructed nondeterministic subtree match-
ing PDA is an input–driven PDA and therefore can be determinised [28].


Algorithm 2. Construction of a nondeterministic subtree matching PDA for a
tree t in prefix notation pref(t).
Input: A tree t over a ranked alphabet A; prefix notation pref(t) = a1 a2 . . . an ,
n ≥ 1.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                       341
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar

  a0|S → ε
  a1|S → S
 a2|S → SS


          a2|S → SS       a2|S → SS       a0|S → ε        a1|S → S       a0|S → ε       a1|S → S       a0|S → ε
      0                1                2               3                4               5               6               7




Fig. 7. Transition diagram of nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mp (t1 ) for tree t1
in prefix notation pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 from Example 6


Output: Nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mnps (t) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A,
{S}, δ, 0, S, {n}).
Method:
1. Create PDA Mnps (t) as PDA Mp (t) by Alg. 1.
2. For each symbol a ∈ A create a new transition δ(0, a, S) = (0, S Arity(a) ),
   where S 0 = ε.

Example 6. The subtree matching PDA, constructed by Alg. 2 from tree t1 hav-
ing prefix notation pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0, is the nondeterministic PDA
Mnps (t1 ) = ({0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7}, A, {S}, δ2, 0, S, {7})), where mapping δ2 is a
set of the following transitions:

                           δ2 (0, a2, S) = (1, SS)
                           δ2 (1, a2, S) = (2, SS)                δ2 (0, a2, S) = (0, SS)
                           δ2 (2, a0, S) = (3, ε)                 δ2 (0, a1, S) = (0, S)
                           δ2 (3, a1, S) = (4, S)                 δ2 (0, a0, S) = (0, ε)
                           δ2 (4, a0, S) = (5, ε)
                           δ2 (5, a1, S) = (6, S)
                           δ2 (6, a0, S) = (7, ε)


   The transition diagram of the nondeterministic PDA Mnps (t1 ) is illustrated in
Fig. 7.                                                                          
                                                                                 

Theorem 4. Given a tree t and its prefix notation pref(t), the PDA Mnps (t) con-
structed by Alg. 2 is a subtree matching PDA for pref(t).

Proof. According to Theorem 2, given an input tree t, each subtree in prefix
notation is a substring of pref(t). Since the PDA Mnps (s) has just states and
transitions equivalent to the states and transitions, respectively, of the string
matching automaton, the PDA Mnps (t) accepts all matches of subtree s in tree
t by final state.                                                               
                                                                                

   For the construction of deterministic subtree PDA, we use the transformation
described by Alg. 3. This transformation is based on the well known transfor-
mation of nondeterministic finite automaton to an equivalent deterministic one,
which constructs the states of the deterministic automaton as subsets of states




342                                                         ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


of the nondeterministic automaton and selects only a set of accessible states
(i.e. subsets) [16]. Again, states of the resulting deterministic PDA correspond
to subsets of states of the original nondeterministic PDA.

Algorithm 3. Transformation of an input–driven nondeterministic PDA to an
equivalent deterministic PDA.
Input: Input–driven nondeterministic PDA Mnx (t) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A, {S}, δ,
0, S, F )
Output: Equivalent deterministic PDA Mdx (t) = (Q , A, {S}, δ  , qI , S, F  ).
Method:

 1. Initially, Q = {{0}}, qI = {0} and {0} is an unmarked state.
 2. (a) Select an unmarked state q  from Q .
    (b) For each input symbol a ∈ A:
            i. q  = {q : δ(p, a, α) = (q, β) for all p ∈ q  }.
           ii. Add transition δ  (q  , a, S) = (q  , S Arity (a)).
          iii. If q  ∈
                       / Q then add q  to Q and set it as unmarked state.
    (c) Set state q  as marked.
 3. Repeat step 2 until all states in Q are marked.
 4. F  = { q  | q  ∈ Q ∧ q  ∩ F = ∅ }.                                                
                                                                                            

   The deterministic subtree matching automaton Mdps (t) for a tree t with prefix
notation pref(t) is demonstrated by the following example.

Example 7. The deterministic subtree matching PDA for tree t1 in prefix nota-
tion pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 from Example 1 , which has been con-
structed by Alg. 3 from nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mnps (t1 ) from
Example 6, is the deterministic PDA Mdps (t1 ) = ({[0], [0, 1], [0, 1, 2], [0, 3], [0, 4],
[0, 5], [0, 6], [0, 7]}, A, {S}, δ3, [0], S, {[0, 7]}), where its transition diagram is illus-
trated in Fig. 9.
     We note that the deterministic subtree matching PDA Mdps (t1 ) has a very
similar transition diagram to the deterministic string matching automaton con-
structed for pref(t1 ) [9, 22], as can be seen by comparing Figs. 2 and 9. The
only difference between the two types of automata are the pushdown opera-
tions appearing in the subtree matching PDA, which ensure the validity of the
input tree. The input tree is valid only if the pushdown store of the subtree PDA
is emptied after the last symbol from the prefix notation of the input tree is read.
     Fig. 8 shows the sequence of transitions (trace) performed by the deter-
ministic subtree PDA Mdps (t1 ) for an input tree t2 in prefix notation pref(t2 ) =
a2 a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0. The accepting state is {0, 7}. Fig. 10
depicts the pattern subtree t1 and input tree t2 .                                          
                                                                                            


Theorem 5. Given a nondeterministic input–driven PDA Mnx (t) = (Q, A, {S},
δ, q0 , S, F ), the deterministic PDA Mdx (t) = (Q , A, {S}, δ  , {q0 }, S, F  ) which is
constructed by Alg. 3 is equivalent to PDA Mnx (t).




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                          343
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar




                             State                    Input                  PDS
                            {0}       a2 a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0    S
                            {0, 1} a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0         SS
                            {0, 1, 2} a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0        SSS
                            {0, 1, 2} a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0          SSSS
                            {0, 3} a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0                 SSS
                            {0, 4} a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0                    SSS
                            {0, 5} a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0                        SS
                            {0, 6} a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0                           SS
                            {0, 7} a1 a1 a2 a0 a0              match            S
                            {0}       a1 a2 a0 a0                               S
                            {0}       a2 a0 a0                                  S
                            {0, 1} a0 a0                                       SS
                            {0}       a0                                        S
                            {0}       ε                                         ε


Fig. 8. Trace of deterministic subtree PDA Mdps (t1 ) from Example 7 for an input subtree
t2 in prefix notation pref(t2 ) = a2 a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0




                                                                                                                                                a2|S → SS
 a0|S → ε                                                                                                                   a2|S → SS
                                                                                                         a2|S → SS
 a1|S → S                                           a2|S → SS                      a2|S → SS
                                                              a2|S → SS

            a2|S → SS            a2|S → SS               a0|S → ε            a1|S → S            a0|S → ε             a1|S → S            a0|S → ε
      [0]                [0, 1]                [0, 1, 2]               [0, 3]               [0, 4]                [0, 5]               [0, 6]               [0, 7]

                  a1|S → S
                  a0|S → ε
                                  a1|S → S
                                                 a0|S → ε
                                                                  a1|S → S
                                                                                  a0|S → ε
                                                                                                a1|S → S
                                                                                                                 a1|S → S
                                                                                                                 a0|S → ε




Fig. 9. Transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mdps (t1 ) for tree t1 in prefix notation
pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 from Example 7




344                                                                        ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                  Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


Proof. First, we prove the following claim by induction on i:
(*): (q1 , w, S) iMdx (t) (q2 , ε, S j ) if and only if
q2 = {p : (q, w, S) iMnx (t) (p, ε, S j ) for some q ∈ q1 }.
1. Assume i=1.
      – if : if (q1 , a, S) Mdx (t) (q2 , ε, S j ), then there exists a state q ∈ q1 , where
        (q, a, S) Mnx (t) (p, ε, S j ), p ∈ q2 .
      – only if : if (q, a, S) Mnx (t) (p, ε, β), then for each q1 ∈ Q , where q ∈ q1 ,
        it holds that (q1 , a, S) Mdx (t) (q2 , ε, S j ), where p ∈ q2 .
2. Assume that claim (*) holds for i = 1, 2, . . . , k, k ≥ 1.
   This means that (q1 , w, S) kMdx (t) (q2 , ε, S j ) if and only if
   q2 = {p : (q, S, w) kMnx (t) (p, ε, S j ) for some q ∈ q1 }. We have to prove that
   claim (*) holds also for i = k + 1.
      – if : if (q1 , w, S) kMdx (t) (q2 , a, S l ) Mdx (t) (q3 , ε, S j ) , then there exists a
        state q ∈ q2 , where (q, a, S l ) Mnx (t) (p, ε, S j ), p ∈ q3 .
      – only if : if (q0 , pref (t), S) kMnx (t) (q, a, S l ) Mnx (t) (p, ε, S j ), then for
        each q1 ∈ Q , where q ∈ q1 , it holds that (q1 , a, S l ) Mdx (t) (q2 , ε, S j ),
        where p ∈ q2 .
     As a special case of claim (*), ({q0 }, pref (t), S) iMdx (t) (q  , ε, ε) if and only
if (q0 , S, pref (t)) iMnx (t) (q1 , ε, ε). Thus, the theorem holds.




                                                                            a2


                  a2                                                a2              a1


          a2               a1                              a2               a1      a1


   a0             a1       a0                      a0               a1      a0      a2


                  a0                                                a0      a0              a0

pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0        pref(t2 ) = a2 a2 a2 a0 a1 a0 a1 a0 a1 a1 a2 a0 a0
post(t1 ) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2        post(t2 ) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2 a0 a0 a2 a1 a1 a2

Fig. 10. Trees t1 and t2 from Example 7 along with their prefix and postfix notations




Theorem 6. Given a tree t with n nodes in its prefix or postfix notation, the
deterministic subtree matching PDA Mpds (t) constructed by Alg. 2 and 3 is
made of exactly n + 1 states, one pushdown symbol and |A|(n + 1) transitions.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                               345
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


Proof. Let Mnps (t) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, {n} be an automaton con-
structed from tree t with a prefix notation pref(t) = a1 a2 . . . an over ranked
alphabet A by Alg. 2. We will prove that this automaton is directly analogous to
the string matching automaton and accepts the same language if we ignore the
pushdown operations, which actually do not affect the process of determinisa-
tion as Mpds is an input–driven automaton. From Alg 2 and 3, Mnps (t) has tran-
sitions δ(0, a, S) = (0, S Arity(a) ) for all a ∈ A and δ(i − 1, ai , S) = (i, ε, S Arity(ai ) ).
The proof is a mutual induction of the following n + 1 statements:
 (1) δ ∗ (0, w, S) = (0, ε, S ac(w) ), w ∈ A∗ .
 (2) δ ∗ (0, w, S) = (1, ε, S ac(w) ) if and only if w = w1 a1 , w1 ∈ A∗
 (i) δ ∗ (0, w, S) = (i − 1, ε, S ac(w) ) if and only if w = w1 a1 a2 . . . ai−1 , w1 ∈ A∗
 1. Assume that |w| = 0, which means w = ε. Statement (1) holds, since
    δ ∗ (0, ε, S) = (0, ε, S). Statements (i), 1 < i ≤ n + 1, do not hold as δ ∗ (0, ε, S)
    contains, from its basic definition, only (0, ε, S).
 2. Assume w = w1 a, where w1 ∈ Ak , that is |w1 | = k and a ∈ A. We may
    assume that statements (i) 1 < i ≤ n + 1 hold for w1 , and we need to prove
    them for w. We assume the inductive hypothesis for k and prove it for k + 1.
    (a) There exists a series of transitions (0, w1 , S) ∗ (0, ε, S ac(w1 ) ), since
          δ(0, a, S) = (0, ε, S Arity(a) ) are transitions of automaton Mnps .Thus state-
          ment (1) is proved for w.
    (b) We now prove statements i, where 1 < i ≤ n + 1:
            – If: Assume that w1 = w2 a1 a2 . . . ai−2 , where w2 ∈ A∗ and a =
               ai−1 . By statement (i − 1) applied to w1 , we know from our induc-
               tion hypothesis that there exists a series of transitions (0, w1 , S) ∗
               (i − 2, ε, S ac(w1 ) ). Since for all 1 ≤ j ≤ n there exists a transi-
               tion δ(j − 1, aj , S) = (j, S Arity(aj ) ), we conclude that δ ∗ (0, w, S) =
               (i − 1, ε, S ac(w) ).
            – Only if: Suppose there exists a series of transitions (0, w, S) ∗
               (i − 1, ε, S ac(w) ). From the inductive assumption we know that there
               exists a series of transitions (0, w1 , S) ∗ (i − 2, ε, S ac(w1 ) ). By state-
               ment (i − 1) applied to w1 , we know that w1 = w2 a1 a2 . . . ai−2 . Thus
               w = w2 a1 a2 . . . ai−1 , and we have proved statement (i).
Thus, from statements 1, . . . , n + 1, if we ignore the pushdown operations, Mpds
accepts the language L = {w.pref(t)}, where w ∈ A∗ . Since the subtree match-
ing PDA is directly analogous to the string matching automaton, we can use the
proof from [10, 22] for space and time complexities.                            
                                                                                
Theorem 7. Given an input tree t with n nodes, the searching phase of the
deterministic subtree matching automaton constructed by Algs. 2 and 3 is O(n).
Proof. The searching phase consists of reading tree t once, symbol by symbol
from left to right. The appropriate transition is taken each time a symbol is read,
resulting in exactly n transitions. Each transition consumes a constant time be-
cause the time of each pushdown operation is limited by the maximal arity of
nodes. Occurrences of the subtree to find are matched by transitions leading to
the final states.                                                                
                                                                                 




346                                         ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


    Finally, we note that trees having structure pref(t) = (a1)n−1 a0 represent
strings. The deterministic subtree matching PDA for such trees has the same
number of states and transitions as the deterministic string matching automaton
constructed for pref(t) and accepts the same language.


5.   Multiple subtree matching
In this section we present a generalization of Problem 1. We deal with the con-
struction of subtree matching PDA over a finite set of trees. The whole concept
is demonstrated with an example.
Problem 2 (Multiple Subtree Matching). Given a tree t and a set of m trees
P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm }, find all occurrences of trees t1 , t2 , . . . , tm in tree t.
Definition 3. Let P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } be a set of m trees and pref(ti ), 1 ≤ i ≤ m
be the prefix notation of the i-th tree in P . Given an input tree t, a subtree
pushdown automaton constructed over set P accepts all matches of subtrees
t1 , t2 , . . . , tm in the input tree t by final state.
      Similarly as in Section 4, our method begins with a PDA which accepts trees
t1 , t2 , . . . , tm in their prefix notation. The construction of this PDA is described
by Alg. 4
Algorithm 4. Construction of a PDA accepting a set of trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm }
in their prefix notation.
Input: A set of trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } over a ranked alphabet A; prefix nota-
tion pref(ti ) = a1 a2 . . . ani , 1 ≤ i ≤ m, ni ≥ 1.
Output: PDA Mp (P ) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , q}, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ).
Method:
 1. Let q ← 0 and F ← ∅
 2. For each tree ti = ai1 ai2 . . . ai|ti | , 1 ≤ i ≤ m, do
    (a) Let l ← 0
    (b) For j = 1 to |ti | do
          i. If the transition δ(l, aij , S) is not defined then
              A. Let q ← q + 1
                                                                  i
              B. Create a transition δ(l, aij , S) ← (q, S Arity(aj ) )
              C. Let l ← q
         ii. Else if transition δ(l, aij , S) is defined
              A. l ← p where (p, γ) ← δ(l, aj , S)
    (c) F ← F ∪ {l}
Example 8. Consider a set of trees P = {t1 , t2 , t3 }, with their prefix notations
being pref(t1 ) = a2 a2 a0 a0 b0, pref(t2 ) = a2 b1 a0 a0 and pref(t3 ) = a2 a0 a0.
The deterministic PDA constructed by Alg. 4 accepting the prefix notation of
trees in P is Mp (P ) = ({0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, A, {S}, δ1 , 0, S, {5, 8, 10})),
where mapping δ1 is a set of the following transitions:




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                         347
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar



                                                    a0|S → ε        a0|S → ε       b0|S → ε
                        a2|S → SS             2                3                4               5


          a2|S → SS
      0                   1
                                   b1|S → S

                                                    a0|S → ε        a0|S → ε
                                               6                7                8

                       a0|S → ε



                                                   a0|S → ε
                                               9                10




Fig. 11. Transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mp (P ) accepting the trees with prefix
notation {a2 a2 a0 a0 b0, a2 b1 a0 a0, a2 a0 a0} from Example 8


                                        δ1 (0, a2, S) = (1, SS)
                                        δ1 (1, a2, S) = (2, SS)
                                        δ1 (2, a0, S) = (3, ε)
                                        δ1 (3, a0, S) = (4, ε)
                                        δ1 (4, b0, S) = (5, ε)
                                        δ1 (1, b1, S) = (6, S)
                                        δ1 (6, a0, S) = (7, ε)
                                        δ1 (7, a0, S) = (8, ε)
                                        δ1 (1, a0, S) = (9, ε)
                                        δ1 (9, a0, S) = (10, ε)


  The transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mp (P ) is illustrated in Fig. 11.
  Fig. 12 shows the sequence of transitions (trace) performed by deterministic
PDA Mp (P ) for trees t1 , t2 , t3 ∈ P in prefix notation.                     
                                                                               

   The correctness of the deterministic PDA constructed by Alg. 4, which ac-
cepts trees in prefix notation, is described by the following lemma.

Lemma 2. Given a set of k trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } and their prefix notation
pref(ti ), 1 ≤ i ≤ m, the PDA Mp (P ) = ({0, 1, 2, . . . , n}, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ), where
                                              k
1 + min(|t1 |, |t2 |, . . . , |tm |) ≤ n ≤ 1 + j=1 |tj |, constructed by Alg. 4 accepts
pref(ti ), where 1 ≤ ti ≤ m.

Proof. By induction on the height of trees t1 , t2 , . . . , tm :
 1. If trees t1 , t2 , . . . , tm have just one node, a1 , a2 , . . . , ak respectively, where
    Arity(ai ) = 0, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k, then Height(ti ) = 0, pref(ti ) = ai , δ(0, ai , S) =
    (i, ε) ∈ δ, (0, ai , S) Mp (P ) (i, ε, ε) for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k and the claim holds.




348                                                ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                          Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


                               State      Input     Pushdown Store
                              0      a2 a2 a0 a0 b0              S
                              1      a2 a0 a0 b0              SS
                              2      a0 a0 b0               SSS
                              3      a0 b0                    SS
                              4      b0                          S
                              5      ε                           ε
                              accept
                              0      a2 b1 a0 a0                 S
                              1      b1 a0 a0                 SS
                              6      a0 a0                    SS
                              7      a0                          S
                              8      ε                           ε
                              accept
                              0      a2 a0 a0                    S
                              1      a0 a0                    SS
                              9      a0                          S
                              10     ε                           ε
                              accept


Fig. 12. Trace of deterministic PDA Mp (P ) from Example 8 for trees in prefix notation
{a2 a2 a0 a0 b0, a2 b1 a0 a0, a2 a0 a0}


2. Assume that the claim holds for trees t11 , t12 , . . . , t1p1 , t21 , t22 , . . . , t2p2 , . . . , tk1 , tk2 ,
   . . . , tkpk where pi ≥ 1 for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k, Height(ti1 ) ≤ m, Height(ti2 ) ≤ m, . . .,
   Height(tip ) ≤ m, m ≥ 0, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k.
   We have to prove that the claim holds also for each tree ti , 1 ≤ i ≤ k, such
   that
   pref(ti ) = ai pref(ti1 )pref(ti2 ) . . . pref(tipi ), Arity(ai ) = pi , and Height(ti ) ≥
   m + 1:
   Since δ(0, ai , S) = (i, S p ) ∈ δ, and (0, a pref(ti1 )pref(ti2 ) . . . pref(tipi ), S)
      Mp (ti ) (i, pref(t1 )pref(t2 ) . . . pref(tpi ), S )
                            i            i               i     p
      ∗                                                pi −1
      Mp (ti )  (j i
                     , pref(t i
                              2 ) . . . pref(t i
                                               pi ), S       )
      ∗
      Mp (ti ) . . .
      ∗
      Mp (ti ) ( , pref(tpi ), S)
                   i          i

      ∗
      Mp (ti ) (f , ε, ε)
                    i

   the claim holds for that tree.
Thus, the lemma holds.                                                                                         
                                                                                                               

    The deterministic subtree matching PDA for multiple tree patterns in prefix
notation can be constructed in a similar fashion to the subtree matching PDA for
a single pattern. First, the PDA accepting a set of trees in their prefix notations,
constructed by Alg. 4, is used to construct a nondeterministic subtree matching
PDA by Alg. 5. The constructed nondeterministic subtree matching PDA is then
transformed to the equivalent deterministic subtree matching PDA.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                             349
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar

a2|S → SS
 b1|S → S
 b0|S → ε                                         a0|S → ε        a0|S → ε         b0|S → ε
 a0|S → ε              a2|S → SS             2                3                 4               5


          a2|S → SS
      0                   1
                                   b1|S → S

                                                   a0|S → ε        a0|S → ε
                                               6                7                 8

                       a0|S → ε



                                                   a0|S → ε
                                               9               10




Fig. 13. Transition diagram of nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mp (P ) con-
structed over trees in set P from Example 9


Algorithm 5. Construction of a nondeterministic subtree matching PDA for a
set of trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } in their prefix notation.
Input: A tree t over a ranked alphabet A; prefix notation pref(t) = a1 a2 . . . an ,
n ≥ 1.
Output: Nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mnps (t) = (Q, A, {S}, δ, 0, S,
F ).
Method:
1. Create PDA Mnps (t) as PDA Mp (t) = (Q, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ) by Alg. 4.
2. For each symbol a ∈ A create a new transition δ(0, a, S) = (0, S Arity(a) ),
   where S 0 = ε.
                                                                             
                                                                             
Example 9. The subtree matching PDA constructed by Alg. 2 over the set of
trees P from Example 8 is the nondeterministic PDA Mnps (P ) = ({0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10}, A, {S}, δ2 , 0, S, {5, 8, 10})), where mapping δ2 is a set of the follow-
ing transitions:
                        δ2 (0, a2, S) = (1, SS)
                        δ2 (1, a2, S) = (2, SS)         δ2 (0, a2, S) = (0, SS)
                        δ2 (2, a0, S) = (3, ε)          δ2 (0, b1, S) = (0, S)
                        δ2 (3, a0, S) = (4, ε)          δ2 (0, b0, S) = (0, ε)
                        δ2 (4, b0, S) = (5, ε)          δ2 (0, a0, S) = (0, ε)
                        δ2 (1, b1, S) = (6, S)
                        δ2 (6, a0, S) = (7, ε)
                        δ2 (7, a0, S) = (8, ε)
                        δ2 (1, a0, S) = (9, ε)
                        δ2 (9, a0, S) = (10, ε)




350                                                ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                                            Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


                                                                                                                                        a0|S → ε
                                                                                                                                        b0|S → ε
                                                                                                               a0|S → ε                b1|S → S
                                                                                   b0|S → ε                   b1|S → S
                                                           a2|S → SS              b1|S → S
                                b0|S → ε

   a0|S → ε                                                                 a0|S → ε                     a0|S → ε                  b0|S → ε
                                                                  0, 1, 2                        0, 3, 9                   0, 4, 10                 0, 5
   b0|S → ε                          a2|S → SS
   b1|S → S                                                          b1|S → S
                                                                                   a2|S → SS                 a2|S → SS               a2|S → SS
                  b0|S → ε
       0                       0, 1
               a2|S → SS
                                                   b1|S → S                       a2|S → SS                 a2|S → SS
                       a0|S → ε
                                              a2|S → SS
                                                                             a0|S → ε                     a0|S → ε
                                                                  0, 6                           0, 7                       0, 8

                                                    b0|S → ε
                                                    b1|S → S                   b0|S → ε
                              b0|S → ε                                         b1|S → S                   a0|S → ε
                              b1|S → S                                                                     b0|S → ε
           a0|S → ε                                                                                        b1|S → S
                                                        a2|S → SS                   a2|S → SS
           b0|S → ε
           b1|S → S                                                   a0|S → ε
                                                           0, 9                          0, 10




Fig. 14. Transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mdps (P ) constructed over trees in set
P from Example 10


   The transition diagram of nondeterministic PDA Mnps (P ) is illustrated in
Fig. 13.                                                                    
                                                                            

Theorem 8. Given a set of m trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } and their prefix nota-
tion pref(ti ), 1 ≤ i ≤ m, the PDA Mnps (P ) constructed by Alg. 5 is a subtree
matching PDA for tree patterns t1 , t2 , . . . , tm .

Proof. According to Theorem 2, given an input tree t, each subtree in prefix no-
tation is a substring of pref(t). Since the PDA Mnps (P ) has just states and tran-
sitions equivalent to the states and transitions, respectively, of the Aho-Corasick
string matching automaton , the PDA Mnps (P ) accepts all matches of subtrees
t1 , t2 , . . . , tm in tree t by final state.                                    
                                                                                  

   For the construction of deterministic subtree PDA, we use the transformation
described by Alg. 3 from Section 4.
   The deterministic subtree matching automaton Mdps (P ) for a set of trees
P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } with prefix notations pref(ti ), 1 ≤ i ≤ k is demonstrated by
the following example.

Example 10. The deterministic subtree matching PDA for the set of trees P
from Example 8, constructed by Alg. 3 from the nondeterministic subtree match-
ing PDA Mnps (P ) from Example 9, is Mdps (P ) = ({[0], [0, 1], [0, 1, 2], [0, 3, 9],
[0, 4, 10], [0, 5], [0, 6], [0, 7], [0, 8], [0, 9], [0, 10]}, A, {S}, δ3 , [0], S, {[0, 4, 10], [0, 5],
[0, 8], [0, 10]}), with its transition diagram illustrated in Fig. 14.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                                                                   351
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


    We note that the deterministic subtree matching PDA Mdps (P ) has a very
similar transition diagram to the Aho-Corasick string matching automaton con-
structed for the strings representing the prefix notations of trees in set P from
Example 8 (see also [1, 9, 22]), as can be seen by comparing Figs. 4 and 14.
    Fig. 15 shows the sequence of transitions (trace) performed by the de-
terministic subtree PDA Mdps (P ) for the input tree t having prefix notation
pref(t) = a2 a2 a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0. The final states are
{[0, 4, 10], [0, 5], [0, 8], [0, 10]}. Fig. 16 depicts the pattern subtrees from set P
and the input tree t.                                                                
                                                                                     


                 State                      Input                    PDS
               {0}        a2 a2 a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0     S
               {0, 1}     a2 a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0       SS
               {0, 1, 2} a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0          SSS
               {0, 1, 2} a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0           SSSS
               {0, 3, 9} a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0                SSS
               {0, 4, 10} a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0     match         SS
               {0, 1}     a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0                     SSS
               {0, 1, 2} a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0                       SSSS
               {0, 3, 9} a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0                            SSS
               {0, 4, 10} b0 a2 b1 a0 a0              match            SS
               {0, 5}     a2 b1 a0 a0                 match             S
               {0, 1}     b1 a0 a0                                     SS
               {0, 6}     a0 a0                                        SS
               {0, 7}     a0                                            S
               {0, 8}     ε                          match              ε


Fig. 15. Trace of deterministic subtree PDA Mdps (P ) from Example 10 for tree t2 in prefix
notation pref(t) = a2 a2 a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0.




Theorem 9. Given a set of m trees P = {t1 , t2 , . . . , tm } over a ranked alphabet
A, the deterministic subtree matching PDA Mpds (P ) is constructed  m     by Alg. 5
and 3 in time Θ(|A|s), requires Θ(|A|s) storage, where s = i=1 |ti |, and its
pushdown store alphabet consists of one symbol.
Proof. Since the subtree matching PDA for multiple patterns is directly analo-
gous to the Aho-Corasick string matching automaton (this can be proved from
proof of Theorem 6), we can use the proof from [1] and [26].                
                                                                            
Theorem 10. Given an input tree t with n nodes, the searching phase of the
deterministic subtree matching automaton constructed by Algs. 2 and 3 over a
set of m trees P is O(n).
Proof. The searching phase consists of reading tree t once, symbol by symbol
from left to right. The appropriate transition is taken each time a symbol is read,




352                                      ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                                    Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


                        a2


                a2              b0


          a0            a0



           pref(t) = a2 a2 a0 a0 b0
           post(t) = a0 a0 a2 b0 a2
                                                                        a2


                a2                                       a2                             a2


          b1            a0                   a2                    a2            b1              a0


          a0                          a0            a0        a2          b0     a0


                                                    a0             a0
           pref(t) = a2 b1 a0 a0
           post(t) = a0 b1 a0 a2
                                           pref(t) = a2 a2 a2 a0 a0 a2 a2 a0 a0 b0 a2 b1 a0 a0
                                           post(t) = a0 a0 a2 a0 a0 a2 b0 a2 a2 a0 b1 a0 a2 a2
                a2


          a0            a0



           pref(t) = a2 a0 a0
           post(t) = a0 a0 a2


Fig. 16. Pattern subtrees from set P and the input tree from Example 10 along with their
prefix and postfix notations



resulting in exactly n transitions. Each transition consumes a constant time be-
cause the time of each pushdown operation is limited by the maximal arity of
nodes. Occurrences of the subtree to find are matched by transitions leading to
the final states.                                                             
                                                                              


6.   Subtree matching in postfix notation
In this section we show the dual principle for the postfix notation. Theorems
11 and 12 present the direct analogy of properties of the prefix and postfix
notations. Theorem 13 is analogous to Theorem 3.
Theorem 11. Given a tree t and its postfix notation post(t), all subtrees of t in
postfix notation are substrings of post(t).
Theorem 12. Let post(t) and w be a tree t in postfix notation and a substring
of post(t), respectively. Then, w is the postfix notation of a subtree of t, if and
only if ac(w) = 0, and ac(w1 ) ≤ −1 for each w1 , where w = xw1 , x = ε.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                                       353
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar

  a0|ε → S
  a1|S → S
 a2|SS → S


            a0|ε → S            a0|ε → S               a1|S → S         a2|SS → S            a0|ε → S             a1|S → S         a2|SS → S
       0                  1                     2                      3                  4                     5                    6                   7




Fig. 17. Transition diagram of nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mp (t1 ) for tree t1
in postfix notation post(t1 ) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2 from Example 6



Theorem 13. Let M = ({Q, A, {S}, δ, 0, S, F ) be an input–driven PDA whose
each transition from δ is of the form δ(q1 , a, S i ) = (q2 , S), where i = Arity(a).
Then, if (q3 , w, ε) +
                     M (q4 , ε, S ), then j = −ac(w) + 1.
                                 j




    From the above Theorems, we can easily transform Algorithms 1-5 to work
with the postfix notation of trees. The only change required is in the pushdown
operations. All transitions of the form δ(q, a, S) = (p, S Arity(ai ) ) must be changed
to the form δ(q, a, S Arity(ai ) ) = (p, S). The subtree matching PDA also requires
no initial pushdown store symbol, while after processing a valid tree in postfix
notation, the pushdown store contains a single symbol ’S’.
    Fig. 17 illustrates the nondeterministic subtree matching PDA Mp (t1 ) con-
structed from the postfix notation of the tree from Example 6.
    Fig. 18 illustrates the deterministic subtree matching PDA Md ps(t1 ) con-
structed from the postfix notation of the tree from Example 6.




                                                                                                                                            a2|SS → S
 a0|ε → S                                                                                                               a2|SS → S
                                                                                                     a2|SS → S
 a1|S → S                                          a2|SS → S                   a2|SS → S
                                                             a2|SS → S

            a0|ε → S            a0|ε → S               a1|S → S         a2|SS → S            a0|ε → S             a1|S → S         a2|SS → S
      [0]               [0, 1]               [0, 1, 2]               [0, 3]             [0, 4]                [0, 5]               [0, 6]             [0, 7]

                 a1|S → S
                 a0|ε → S
                                 a1|S → S
                                               a0|ε → S
                                                                a1|S → S
                                                                              a0|ε → S
                                                                                              a1|S → S
                                                                                                             a1|S → S
                                                                                                             a0|ε → S




Fig. 18. Transition diagram of deterministic PDA Mdps (t1 ) for tree t1 in postfix notation
post(t1 ) = a0 a0 a1 a2 a0 a1 a2 from Example 7




354                                                                        ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                             Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


7.   Conclusion

We have introduced a new kind of pushdown automata: subtree matching PDAs
for trees in prefix and postfix notations. These pushdown automata are in their
properties analogous to string matching automata, which are widely used in
stringology [9, 10, 22, 26].
    Regarding specific tree algorithms whose model of computation is the stan-
dard deterministic pushdown automaton, we have recently introduced princi-
ples of other three new algorithms. First, the tree pattern matching PDA [13,
21] which is an extension of the subtree matching PDA presented in this paper.
Second, the subtree and tree pattern PDAs, which represent a complete index
of a given tree by preprocessing it. Searching for all occurrences of a subtree or
a tree pattern of size m is then performed in time linear to m and not depending
on the size of the preprocessed tree [17, 19, 21]. These automata representing
indexes of trees are analogous in their properties to the string suffix and factor
automata [9, 10, 22, 26]. Third, a method on how to find all repeats of connected
subgraphs in trees with the use of subtree or tree pattern PDAs [21, 20]. More
details on these results and related information can also be found on [3].


References
 1. Aho, A.V., Corasick, M.J.: Efficient string matching: an aid to bibliographic search.
    Commun. ACM 18(6), 333–340 (1975)
 2. Aho, A.V., Ullman, J.D.: The theory of parsing, translation, and compiling. Prentice-
    Hall Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1972)
 3. Arbology www pages. Available on: http://www.arbology.org/ (2009), december 2009
 4. Berstel, J.: Transductions and Context-Free Languages. Teubner Studienbucher,
    Stuttgart (1979)
 5. Chase, D.R.: An improvement to bottom-up tree pattern matching. In: POPL. pp.
    168–177 (1987)
 6. Cleophas, L.: Tree Algorithms. Two Taxonomies and a Toolkit. Ph.D. thesis, Tech-
    nische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven (2008)
 7. Cole, R., Hariharan, R., Indyk, P.: Tree pattern matching and subset matching in
    deterministic ( log3 )-time. In: SODA. pp. 245–254 (1999)
 8. Comon, H., Dauchet, M., Gilleron, R., Löding, C., Jacquemard, F., Lugiez, D., Ti-
    son, S., Tommasi, M.: Tree automata techniques and applications. Available on:
    http://www.grappa.univ-lille3.fr/tata (2007), release October, 12th 2007
 9. Crochemore, M., Hancart, C.: Automata for matching patterns. In: Rozenberg, G.,
    Salomaa, A. (eds.) Handbook of Formal Languages, vol. 2 Linear Modeling: Back-
    ground and Application, chap. 9, pp. 399–462. Springer–Verlag, Berlin (1997)
10. Crochemore, M., Rytter, W.: Jewels of Stringology. World Scientific, New Jersey
    (1994)
11. Dubiner, M., Galil, Z., Magen, E.: Faster tree pattern matching. J. ACM 41(2), 205–
    213 (1994)
12. Flouri, T., Janoušek, J., Melichar, B.: Subtree matching by deterministic pushdown
    automata. In: Ganzha, M., Paprzycki, M. (eds.) Proceedings of the IMCSIT, Vol. 4.
    pp. 659–666. IEEE Computer Society Press (2009)




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                     355
Tomáš Flouri, Jan Janoušek, and Bořivoj Melichar


13. Flouri, T., Janoušek, J., Melichar, B.: Tree pattern matching by deterministic push-
    down automata (2009), draft
14. Gecseg, F., Steinby, M.: Tree languages. In: Rozenberg, G., Salomaa, A. (eds.)
    Handbook of Formal Languages, vol. 3 Beyond Words. Handbook of Formal Lan-
    guages, pp. 1–68. Springer–Verlag, Berlin (1997)
15. Hoffmann, C.M., O’Donnell, M.J.: Pattern matching in trees. J. ACM 29(1), 68–95
    (1982)
16. Hopcroft, J.E., Motwani, R., Ullman, J.D.: Introduction to automata theory, lan-
    guages, and computation. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2nd edn. (2001)
17. Janoušek, J.: String suffix automata and subtree pushdown automata. In: Holub,
    J., Žďárek, J. (eds.) Proceedings of the Prague Stringology Conference 2009. pp.
    160–172. Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic (2009), available
    on: http://www.stringology.org/event/2009
18. Janoušek, J., Melichar, B.: On regular tree languages and deterministic pushdown
    automata. Acta Inf. 46(7), 533–547 (2009)
19. Janoušek, J., Melichar, B.: Subtree and tree pattern pushdown automata for trees
    in prefix notation (2009), submitted for publication
20. Janoušek, J., Melichar, B.: Finding repeats of subtrees in a tree using pushdown
    automata (2010), submitted for publication
21. London stringology days 2009 conference presentations. Available on:
    http://www.dcs.kcl.ac.uk/events/LSD&LAW09/, King’s College London, London
    (2009)
22. Melichar, B., Holub, J., Polcar, J.: Text searching algorithms. Available on:
    http://stringology.org/athens/ (2005), release November 2005
23. Rozenberg, G., Salomaa, A. (eds.): Handbook of Formal Languages. Springer–
    Verlag, Berlin (1997)
24. Rozenberg, G., Salomaa, A. (eds.): Vol. 1: Word, Language, Grammar, Handbook
    of Formal Languages. Springer–Verlag, Berlin (1997)
25. Shankar, P., Gantait, A., Yuvaraj, A.R., Madhavan, M.: A new algorithm for linear
    regular tree pattern matching. Theor. Comput. Sci. 242(1-2), 125–142 (2000)
26. Smyth, B.: Computing Patterns in Strings. Addison-Wesley-Pearson Education Lim-
    ited, Essex, England (2003)
27. Valiant, L.G., Paterson, M.: Deterministic one-counter automata. In: Automaten the-
    orie und Formale Sprachen. pp. 104–115 (1973)
28. Wagner, K., Wechsung, G.: Computational Complexity. Springer–Verlag, Berlin
    (2001)



Tomáš Flouri graduated at the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, Faculty of Electrical Engineering of the Czech Technical University in
Prague in 2008. Since 2008 he has been a Ph.D. student at the same de-
partment. His scientific research focuses on tree algorithms using pushdown
automata.

Jan Janoušek graduated the Department of Computer Science and Engineer-
ing, Faculty of Electrical Engineering of the Czech Technical University in Prague
in 1994. He received his Ph.D. in the field of parsing and translation in 2001. His
research interests include tree algorithms, parsing and translation algorithms




356                                      ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
                                            Subtree Matching by Pushdown Automata


and attribute grammars. Since July 2009 he has been working as an assistant
professor at the Department of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Infor-
mation Technology of the Czech Technical University in Prague.

Bořivoj Melichar graduated the Faculty of Electrical Engineering of the Czech
Technical University in Prague in 1964. During 1964 - 2009 he worked at the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Faculty of Electrical Engi-
neering of the Czech Technical University in Prague. His interests include pars-
ing and translation algorithms, attribute grammars, and text and tree algorithms.
Since the beginning of 2010 he has been working as a full professor at the De-
partment of Theoretical Computer Science, Faculty of Information Technology
of the Czech Technical University in Prague.


Received: November 16, 2009; Accepted: December 25, 2009.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                              357
UDC 007:681.32, DOI: 10.2298/CSIS1002359L


     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints
        and Complex Functionalities of Business
                       Applications

       Ivan Lukoviü1, Aleksandar Popoviü2, Jovo Mostiü1, and Sonja Ristiü1
                 1
                  University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences,
                    Trg D. Obradoviüa 6, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia
                       {ivan, sdristic}@uns.ac.rs, jovom@t-com.me
                     2
                       University of Montenegro, Faculty of Science,
                Džordža Vašingtona bb, 81000 Podgorica, Montenegro
                                aleksandarp@rc.pmf.ac.me



       Abstract. IIS*Case is a software tool that provides information system
       modeling and prototypes generation. At the level of platform
       independent model specifications, IIS*Case provides conceptual
       modeling of database schemas that include specifications of various
       database constraints, such as domain, not null, key and unique
       constraints, as well as various kinds of inclusion dependencies. It also
       provides conceptual modeling of business applications. In the paper, we
       present new concepts and a tool embedded into IIS*Case, that is aimed
       at supporting specification of check constraints. We present a domain
       specific language for specifying check constraints and a tool that
       enables visually oriented design and parsing check constraints. Also, we
       present concepts and a tool that is aimed at supporting specification of
       complex (i.e. "nonstandard") functionalities of business applications. It is
       provided visually oriented and platform independent specification of
       business application functions.
       Keywords: Information system design; Platform Independent Models
       and Model Driven Software Development; Check constraint
       specification; Function specification.




1.     Introduction

Integrated Information Systems CASE Tool (IIS*Case) is a software tool
aimed at assisting the information system (IS) design and at generating
executable application prototypes. Currently, IIS*Case provides:
x Conceptual modeling of database schemas, transaction programs, and
  business applications of an IS;
x Automated design of relational database subschemas in the 3rd normal
  form (3NF);
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


x Automated integration of subschemas into a unified database schema in
  the 3NF;
x Automated generation of SQL/DDL code for various database management
  systems (DBMSs);
x Conceptual design of common user-interface (UI) models; and
x Automated generation of executable prototypes of business applications.
Apart from the tool, we also define a methodological approach to the
application of IIS*Case in the software development process. By this
approach, the software development process provided by IIS*Case is, in
general, evolutive and incremental. We believe that it enables an efficient and
continuous development of a software system, as well as an early delivery of
software prototypes that can be easily upgraded or amended according to the
new or changed users' requirements.
   In the paper [11] we considered the application of the model-driven
software engineering (MDSE) principles in IIS*Case. In our approach we
strictly differentiate between the specification of a system and its
implementation on a particular platform. Therefore, modeling is performed at
the high abstraction level, because a designer creates an IS model without
specifying any implementation details. Such a model may be classified as a
Platform-Independent Model (PIM) of the MDA pattern ([9], [16], [17], [21],
[22], [23]). Besides, IIS*Case provides some model-to-model transformations
from PIM to Platform-Specific Models (PSM) and model-to-code
transformations from PSMs to the executable program code.
   In the paper [1] we argued that IIS*Case and our approach are suitable for
end-user development (EUD), as it was considered in [3], [4], [20], and [25].
Besides, there are many EUD approaches and tools that provide the assistance
to designers and end-users in creating IS specifications. One of them is
presented in [24]. We also considered IIS*Case as a tool from the class of
domain oriented design environments (DODE), as it is defined in [20]. In [1] we
also present basic features of SQL Generator that are already implemented into
IIS*Case, and aspects of its application. We also present methods for
implementation of a selected database constraint, using mechanisms provided
by a relational DBMS.
   A case study illustrating main features of IIS*Case and the methodological
aspects of its usage is given in [10], and accordingly we do not repeat the
same explanations here. Apart from [1], [10] and [11], detailed information
about IIS*Case may be found in several authors' references, as well as in [15]
and [19]. The methodological approach to the application of IIS*Case is
presented in more details in [13], while an approach to the formal specification
of database constraints provided by IIS*Case is presented in [12].
   At the abstraction level of PIMs, IIS*Case provides conceptual modeling of
database schemas that include specifications of various database constraints,
such as domain, not null, key and unique constraints, as well as various kinds
of inclusion dependencies. Such a model is automatically transformed into a
model of relational database schema, which is still technology independent
specification. An SQL generator is embedded into IIS*Case. It provides further




360                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                           Business Applications

transformation of database schema into the platform specific SQL/DDL code,
for various target DBMS platforms [1]. It is an example of model-to-code
transformations provided by IIS*Case. Apart from the generation of key,
unique, not null, and native referential integrity constraints, SQL Generator
also provides the implementation of the default, partial and full referential
integrity constraints, and the selection of an appropriate action from the set
{No Action, Cascade, Set Default, Set Null}. It also provides the
implementation of the inverse referential integrity constraints [1].
   Previous versions of IIS*Case did not provide formal specification of check
constraints, at all. Research efforts presented in this paper were directed
toward introducing new concepts and a tool that enable a designer to formally
specify and validate such constraints. An important expectation was to
introduce new concepts that are platform independent, so as to provide formal
specification of check constraints at the abstraction level of PIMs.
   In the paper we present a domain specific language (DSL) aimed at
defining check constraints at the level of PIMs. By means of this language, a
designer may specify logical expressions of an arbitrary complexity for
validating attribute values. The language provides a recognition and usage of
other necessary PIM concepts embedded into IIS*Case, and therefore helps a
designer in specifying expressions using problem domain concepts, as it is
considered in [6], [8] and [14]. Besides, the language does not comprise any
platform specific concepts, so check expressions are created at high
abstraction level. In the paper we also present a tool aimed at specifying and
parsing check constraints in a visually oriented way.
   By this, in the process of database constraint design, we provide designers
a possibility to concentrate mainly on the constraint semantics in a problem
domain, instead of wasting time on their formal specification and validation.
To achieve this goal, we need the appropriate DSLs and PIM concepts
embedded into IIS*Case that are mostly problem oriented, instead of using
relational data model concepts that are more technology specific, or even
SQL DDL syntax, which is fully technology oriented programming language.
Therefore, SQL DDL normally may be used to implement database schema
specifications under a DBMS, but should not be directly used in the design of
IS specifications, particularly at the conceptual level, i.e. at the abstraction
level of PIMs.
   At the abstraction level of PIMs, IIS*Case also provides conceptual
modeling of business applications that include specifications of: (i) UI, (ii)
structures of transaction programs aimed to execute over a database, and (iii)
basic application functionality that includes the following "standard"
operations: data retrieval, inserts, updates, and deletes. Also, a PIM model of
business applications is automatically transformed into a program code of
business applications. In this way, fully executable application prototypes are
generated. For these purposes, User Interface Markup Language (UIML) and
Java Render by Harmonia Incorporation® are chosen programming and run-
time environment [19]. Such a generator is also an example of model-to-code
transformations provided by IIS*Case and its development is almost finished.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               361
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


   Transaction programs of business applications may often comprise not only
basic operations, but also more complex functionalities that cannot be
expressed by a sole retrieve, insert, update, or delete operation. Such
functionality may comprise complex calculations, as well as series of
database operations. Therefore, such functionality we call specific, complex,
or "nonstandard" application functionality. Besides, specifications of check
constraints may reference various complex functions that should be specified
also formally, i.e. in the same way as complex application functionality.
   Basic data operations such as retrieve, insert, update and delete are
common for various problem domains and can be easily specified by means
of IIS*Case concepts. However, business applications from various problem
domains usually comprise complex functionalities. If such functionalities would
not be embedded into the PIM of a software system being designed, a
programmer has to create latter a program code of such functionalities, or at
least has to amend a generated program code, "by hand". In this way,
complex functionalities are modeled at the lowest level of abstraction, by
means of a target programming language which is always platform specific.
As a rule, such created program code becomes unsynchronized with the initial
PIM models of the system during the time. As a consequence, the operational
maintenance of such systems becomes more difficult, with a lot of problems
arising during the software exploitation.
   Previous versions of IIS*Case did not provide formal specification of
complex application functionalities or functions referenced in check
constraints, at the level of PIMs. Research efforts presented in this paper
were directed toward introducing new concepts and a tool that enable a
designer to formally specify complex functionalities. An important expectation
was to introduce new concepts that are platform independent, so as to
provide formal specification of complex functionalities at the abstraction level
of PIMs.
   In the paper we also present concepts and a repository oriented tool aimed
at the specification of functions at the level of PIMs. The name of the tool is
Function Specification Editor or Function Editor for short. By means of
Function Editor a designer may specify functions of an arbitrary complexity. It
provides usage of necessary PIM concepts embedded into IIS*Case, and
helps a designer in specifying functions using not only programming language
concepts, but also problem domain concepts in a certain extent. Besides,
Function Editor does not comprise any platform specific concepts, so
functions are specified at high abstraction level. Also, it provides specifying
functions completely in a visually oriented way. On the basis of Function
Editor and the appropriate repository definitions used by Function Editor as a
part of IIS*Case, it is possible to create a Domain Specific Language (DSL)
for specifying business functions at the level of PIMs, as it is considered in [6],
[8] and [14].
   Apart from Introduction and Conclusion, the paper consists of six sections.
In Section 2 we briefly describe main concepts of the IIS*Case tool that are
important for specification of check constraints and function specifications.
Check constraint expressions are introduced in Section 3, where grammar




362                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

rules are presented. The main features and functionalities of the Expression
Editor tool are presented in Section 4, while the implementation details
concerning parsing of check expressions are presented in Section 5. Function
specifications and related concepts are introduced in Section 6, while the
main features and functionalities of the Function Editor tool are presented in
Section 7.



2.    Preliminaries

At the abstraction level of PIMs, IIS*Case currently provides conceptual
modeling of database schemas and software applications of an IS. Starting
from such PIM models as a source, a chain of transformations is performed
so as to obtain executable program code of software applications and
database SQL/DDL scripts for a selected target platform. The similar idea
may be found also in [2]. For the purpose of readability, in this section we
briefly describe main modeling concepts of IIS*Case that are used at the
abstraction level of PIMs and have an influence on the specification of check
constraints, as well as on the specification and referencing of functions
defined in IIS*Case repository.
    A form type is the main modeling concept in IIS*Case ([10], [12], [15]). It
generalizes document types, i.e. screen forms that users utilize to
communicate with an information system. The similar concept of the form type
may be found in [5] and [7], as well as in many other references. Using the
form type concept in IIS*Case, a designer specifies screen or report forms of
transaction programs and, indirectly, specifies (i) an initial set of attributes and
constraints, (ii) basic functionalities of future transaction programs and (iii)
components of their UI. Each particular business document is observed as an
instance of a form type. A form type concept, as well as related concepts of a
domain and attribute, is platform independent. Here, we use a notion of the
form type instead of a document type, because it is always a structure defined
at the abstraction level of schema. It represents not only a layout structure
(i.e. screen or a report form) of a document, but also a set of database
schema attributes and constraints embedded into a future screen or a report
form of an IS transaction program.
    A form type is a named tree structure, whose nodes are called component
types. Each component type is identified by its name in the scope of the form
type, and has nonempty sets of attributes and keys, and a set of unique
constraints that may be empty. Besides, to each component type must be
associated a set of allowed database operations. It must be a nonempty
subset of the set of "standard" operations {retrieve, insert, update, delete}.
Each attribute of a component type is chosen from the set of all information
system attributes.
    Attributes are globally identified only by their names. IIS*Case imposes
strict rules for specifying attributes and their domains. Attributes in IIS*Case
are classified as elementary or derived. An attribute is elementary if it




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                 363
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


represents values given by end-users directly. Otherwise, it is derived. Values
of a derived attribute are generated (i.e. calculated) from the values of the
other attributes, by applying some algorithm. Such algorithms in IIS*Case are
expressed by a concept of function. Therefore, a specification of a derived
attribute must reference at least one previously defined (elementary or
derived) attribute, and at least one function that is used for calculating its
values.
    Domains in IIS*Case are also globally identified only by their names. They
are classified as primitive and user-defined. Primitive domains are defined
"per se" as primitive data types. They are predefined into the repository of
IIS*Case. An initial collection of primitive domains stored in the repository may
be customized by adding, changing, or even removing specifications of
primitive domains. Each user-defined domain in IIS*Case is created by
referencing a primitive domain, or an already existing user-defined domain. In
this way, user-defined domains are derived from primitive or previously
created user-defined domains. There are four derivation rules that may be
applied to create a user-defined domain from the existing domains: a)
inheritance rule, b) tuple rule, c) set rule, and d) choice rule. A domain
obtained by one of the aforementioned rules is called inherited, tuple, set, or
choice domain, respectively. Tuple, set, or choice domains are also called
complex domains. Recursive multiple application of the aforementioned rules
is allowed.
    Inherited domain inherits all the properties from its source (parent) domain.
If a domain D is defined by the inheritance rule from the parent domain Ds, we
denote it by D = Inherits(Ds). Besides, a separate check expression is to be
assigned to an inherited domain. Therefore, it is more or at least equally
restrictive as its parent domain. If check expressions are defined for both
inherited and its parent domain, in evaluation they are connected by the
logical AND operator. Consequently, in a recursive application of the
inheritance rule, all the domain check expressions in a hierarchy are
connected by the logical AND operators.
    Tuple domain represents tuples (records) of values over source domains.
Therefore, it is defined as a structure D = Tuple(A1 : D1,..., An : Dn), where D is
a tuple domain, and for each i  {1,...,n}, (Ai : Di) is a tuple item, i.e. a
member, where Ai is an attribute with an associated source domain Di.
    Set domain represents values that are sets, each over the same source
domain. Therefore, it is defined as a structure D = Set{Ds}, where D is a set
domain, and Ds is a source domain.
    Choice domain represents values over exactly one of the source domains.
Therefore, it is defined as a structure D = Choice(A1 : D1,..., An : Dn), where D
is a choice domain, and for each i  {1,...,n}, (Ai : Di) is a choice item, i.e. a
member, where Ai is an attribute with an associated source domain Di.
    Check constraints in IIS*Case may be specified at the level of a domain,
attribute or a component type of a form type. A check constraint associated to
a domain or attribute is used to specify a logical condition constraining
allowable values of a sole attribute. A check constraint associated to a
component type is used to specify a logical condition constraining some




364                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

values of each component type instance. Logical conditions of the check
constraints may also reference functions, defined in IIS*Case repository.



3.    Check Expressions

The quality of a whole database schema is substantially influenced by the
quality of constraint specifications. It is very important to define these
specifications at early stages of database schema design process, at
abstraction level of PIMs, if possible. IIS*Case provides specification of
various types of constraints, such as domain, not null, key and unique
constraints, as well as various kinds of inclusion dependencies, at the
abstraction level of PIMs.
   Commercial CASE tools that provide modeling conceptual database
schema specifications by means of Entity-Relationship (ER) data model and
their transforming into the relational data model either provide only partial
specifications of check constraints at the conceptual level, and/or provide a
usage of standard SQL syntax for that purposes. Accordingly, check
constraints may be fully defined only at the level of an implementation
database schema specification, expressed commonly by relational data model
and SQL syntax. For example, Oracle Designer does not allow all kind of
check constraints to be formally defined at the level of an ER database
schema. Sybase Power Designer provides a usage of SQL syntax for that
purposes. On the contrary, check constraints in the IIS*Case tool are defined
at the level of a conceptual database schema as a PIM model, which is
expressed by a set of created form types. For these purposes, we developed
a DSL to create check expressions of various complexity, in a platform
independent way. Such a DSL and a tool embedded into IIS*Case enable a
designer to specify check constraints using problem domain concepts, in a
visually oriented way.
   A check expression is a logical expression. In general, it may include
attribute references, arithmetic, comparison and logical operators, as well as
function calls. As implemented at the level of a target DBMS, it is usually
evaluated in a ternary logic as a value from the set {true, false, unknown},
where true means that an expression is valid, false that it is violated, and
unknown that it is neither valid nor violated. The value unknown is possible to
obtain whenever there are null (missing) values of attributes in the evaluation
of an expression.
   By means of the DSL embedded into IIS*Case, check expressions may be
specified at the level of a (i) domain, (ii) attribute or (iii) component type of a
form type, in a similar way.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                365
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


3.1.    Domain Check Expressions

IIS*Case provides a "universal" set of all domains of a project as a whole.
Domains in IIS*Case are used to express domain constraints, as it is
proposed in [12]. Each specification of a user-defined domain allows defining
a check expression, as a property of the domain specification. Such check
expressions are named domain check expressions.
   A formal specification of the grammar for domain check expressions is
shown in Table 1, in the Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF) notation.

Table 1. Specification of the grammar for domain check expressions
Exp = Exp bin_operator Exp | un_operator Exp | Primary_Exp;
Primary_Exp = constant | value ['.' fieldName] | function_name
'(' [Exp_List] ')' | '(' Exp ')';
Exp_List = Exp { ',' Exp_List};

  The list of standard operators includes the following ones:
x Additive (+, -),
x Multiplicative (*, /),
x Comparison (<, <=, >, =>),
x Equality (= =, !=),
x Concatenation (||),
x Boolean (NOT, AND, OR, XOR, =>),
x Inclusion (IN), and
x Pattern matching (LIKE).
All the operators and parentheses are introduced with the common meaning
and priorities when applying the rules for evaluation of expressions.
   Apart from introducing standard arithmetic, string, comparison and logical
operators existing in all general-purpose languages, we decided also to
introduce the operators LIKE and IN, which are common in database
languages, like SQL. In this way, the language for check expressions
becomes more problem oriented.
   The grammar in Table 1 also provides function calls by referencing the
appropriate function names. It is allowed to reference only the functions
existing in the IIS*Case repository. It is supposed that both built-in and user-
defined functions are stored in the repository. IIS*Case also provides a
specialized DSL and a visually oriented tool for specifying various functions in a
project. By this, it is possible to specify function header, a list of formal
parameters, return value, all local declarations, function body and the exception
handler in a structural way. Functions are specified by means of the technology
independent concepts, at the abstraction level of PIMs, as it is presented in
Sections 6 and 7.
   The grammar in Table 1 allows the use of constants in check expressions.
The common rules for specification and interpretation of constants are
applied, and accordingly we do not describe them in more detail.




366                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
       A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                              Business Applications

  The only variable symbol allowed in domain check expression is value
symbol (VALUE). VALUE denotes any value for which a domain check
expression is validated.
  Only in check expressions associated to a tuple or choice domain it is
possible to qualify VALUE by the attribute name of an item. Therefore,
VALUE.Ai denotes a value of a tuple or choice member (Ai : Di), while
nonqualified VALUE denotes a complete tuple or a choice value.
Example 1. A domain check expression for a numeric domain DGRADE is
given:
                    VALUE >= 5 AND VALUE <= 10.

  It constrains allowable values of DGRADE to the interval from 5 to 10.
Example 2. A domain check expression for a string domain DPHONE is
given:
             VALUE LIKE '5%' AND StrLen(VALUE) = = 7.
   It constrains allowable values of DPHONE to exactly the 7 character long
strings, beginning with '5'. StrLen is a function call that references a function
already specified in the IIS*Case repository.
Example 3. A domain check expression for a string domain DSEMESTER is
given:
VALUE IN {'I', 'II','III','IV','V','VI','VII','VIII','IX', 'X'}.
  It constrains allowable values of DSEMESTER to the list of string values
specified after the inclusion operator IN.
Example 4. A tuple domain DDATE is defined as DATE = Tuple(DAY :
INTEGER, MONTH : INTEGER, YEAR : INTEGER), where INTEGER is
primitive domain. A domain check expression for a tuple domain DDATE is
given:
                   VALUE.DAY <= 31 AND VALUE.DAY >= 1.

  It constrains allowable values of DAY member to the interval from 1 to 31.


3.2.      Attribute Check Expressions

IIS*Case provides a "universal" set of all attributes of a project as a whole.
According to the universal relationship existence assumption (URSA) adopted
from the relational data model, each attribute in IIS*Case is uniquely identified
only by its name. Exactly one domain must be associated to each attribute in
a project. In this way, allowable values of an attribute are constrained by the
appropriate domain constraint.
   IIS*Case allows defining a check expression as a property of the attribute
specification. Such check expressions are named attribute check expressions.
Our DSL has the appropriate grammar rules for specification of attribute
check expressions.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                  367
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


   Suppose that we have an attribute A to which a domain D is associated.
We denote it as (A : D). If a domain check expression is associated to D, then
each attribute A with the associated domain D inherits its domain check
expression. Besides, if we have an attribute check expression assigned to an
attribute A, and a domain check constraint assigned to D, where (A : D) holds,
in evaluation they are connected by the logical AND operator. Obviously, if we
have (possibly a recursive) application of the inheritance rule for the domain
D, all the domain check expressions in a hierarchy are connected alongside
with the attribute check expression by the logical AND operators.
   A formal specification of the grammar for attribute check expressions is
shown in Table 2, in EBNF notation. It is almost identical to the grammar
specification for domain check constraints given in Table 1. The only
difference is in the following. If we specify the attribute check expression for
an attribute with the name A, the only variable symbol allowed in attribute
check constraints, which may replace attName, is A. It is with the same
meaning as it is the symbol VALUE in domain check expressions. Analo-
gously to the domain check constraints, we may additionally qualify A in the
case of a tuple or choice domain associated to A. Therefore, A.Ai denotes a
value of a tuple or choice member (Ai : Di), while nonqualified A denotes a
complete tuple or a choice value.

Table 2. Specification of the grammar for attribute check expressions
Exp = Exp bin_operator Exp | un_operator Exp | Primary_Exp;
Primary_Exp   =   constant   |   attName   ['.'   fieldName]                        |
function_name '(' [Exp_List] ')' | '(' Exp ')';
Exp_List = Exp { ',' Exp_List};

Example 5. An attribute check expression for a numeric attribute GRADE is
given:
                               GRADE >= 6.
   It constrains allowable values of GRADE to be greater or equal 6. If
(GRADE : DGRADE) holds, where DGRADE is a domain from Example 1,
then this check expression is connected to the one from Example 1 by the
operator AND. Consequently, allowable values of GRADE are constrained to
the interval from 6 to 10.


3.3.    Component Type Check Expressions

In IIS*Case, a form type is a hierarchical tree structure of component types,
each of them having nonempty sets of attributes and keys, and a possibly
empty set of unique constraints. Each attribute of a component type is
selected from the set of all attributes of a project, i.e. from the IIS*Case
repository. Therefore, it inherits all its constraints defined at the levels of the
appropriate attribute and domain specifications.




368                                   ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

   IIS*Case also allows defining a check expression as a property of the
component type specification. Such check expressions are named component
type check expressions. Our DSL has the appropriate grammar rules for
specification of component type check expressions.
   The main purpose of domain and attribute check expressions is to
constrain allowable values of a sole attribute. On the contrary, component
type check constraints are used to specify logical conditions that constrain a
tuple of values representing each component type instance.
   A formal specification of the grammar for component type check
expressions is shown in Table 3, in EBNF notation. It is almost identical to the
grammar specification for attribute check constraints given in Table 2. The
only difference is in the following. If we specify the component type check
constraint for a component type N, we may use as variable symbols that are
to replace cmpattName, any of attributes from the component type N, as well
as any of attributes from any superordinated component type in a form type
hierarchy.

Table 3. Specification of the grammar for component type check expressions
Exp = Exp bin_operator Exp | un_operator Exp | Primary_Exp;
Primary_Exp   =  constant   |   cmpattName  ['.'  fieldName]                     |
function_name '(' [Exp_List] ')' | '(' Exp ')';
Exp_List = Exp { ',' Exp_List};

  Analogously to the attribute check constraints, we may additionally qualify
variable A in the case of a tuple or choice domain associated to A. Therefore,
A.Ai denotes a value of a tuple or choice member (Ai : Di), while nonqualified
A denotes a complete tuple or a choice value.
Example 6. In Fig. 1 it is presented a form type Student Records. The form
type is structured as a tree having two component types, STUDENT and
GRADES, which are graphically represented by rectangles. The component
type attributes are shown in italic letters. The key attribute of each component
type is underlined by a solid line, whereas the attribute of a uniqueness
constraint is underlined by a dashed line. Allowed operations for both
component types are shown in small rectangles in the upper-right corners.


 Student Records            STUDENT                     r
                                       StudentId, Year

                             GRADE                  r, i, u, d
                                   CourseId, Date, Grade


Fig. 1. A representation of the form type Student Records.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                369
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


     A check expression for the GRADES component type is given:
     (Year IN {1, 2, 3} => Grade IN {1, 2, 3, 4})
                            AND (Year IN {4, 5} => Grade IN {4, 5}).
  It constrains the possible combinations of values for Year and Grade. If
Year is 1, 2, or 3, Grade must be 1, 2, 3, or 4, and if Year is 4 or 5, Grade
must be 4 or 5.



4.      Check Expression Editor

Check Expression Editor, or Expression Editor for short, is a tool that we
developed and embedded into IIS*Case. It is aimed at specification and
validation of check expressions. It may be called from the
x Domain specification form of IIS*Case, if a domain check constraint need to
  be defined;
x Attribute specification form of IIS*Case, if an attribute check constraint need
  to be defined; or
x Component type specification form of IIS*Case, if a component type check
  constraint need to be defined.
By this, Expression Editor will support the appropriate check expression
grammar, in a context-sensitive way.
   Expression Editor provides two options for specification of check
expressions: (i) guided, by means of a Visual Editor, and (ii) "free form", by
means of a Text Editor. The first option is more suitable for less experienced
users, not knowing the precise grammar rules and therefore needing a guide
in specifying check expressions. The second one is more suitable for more
experienced users, well knowing the precise grammar rules, and wishing to
be as fast as possible in specifying check expressions. The main screen form
of Check Expression Editor is presented in Fig. 2. Visual Editor is positioned
in the center, while Text Editor is positioned in the bottom of the main form of
Expression Editor.
   Text Editor provides direct writing check expressions in a free form way.
Besides, it supports context-sensitive syntax highlighting, as well as standard
text processing commands such as: cut, copy, undo, etc. These commands
are included in the Edit submenu of the main menu, and also in the toolbar
positioned on the left hand side of the main form. Also, the toolbar comprises
a command for performing expression validation.
   By means of Visual Editor, check expressions are modeled by building the
expression trees. Expression tree navigator, as a part of Visual Editor, is
positioned on the left hand side of the main form from Fig. 2. Each node of an
expression tree represents a subexpression, while the root node represents
the main expression. Non-leaf nodes are named complex nodes, because
they represent complex expressions, for example the expressions enclosed
by parentheses, or operator inclusions. Leaf nodes are named simple nodes,




370                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

because they correspond to simple, i.e. primary expressions, like constants,
variables (such as VALUE or attribute names), or function calls.




Fig. 2. Main screen form of Expression Editor

   Visual Editor provides all common functions for editing an expression tree.
These are: inserting, deleting, moving, and editing a node. The last function is
available only for leaf nodes, representing simple expressions.
   When a user wants to insert a complex node, he or she has to select a
language operator or the parentheses symbol from the main toolbar. Each
operator of the language is represented by an appropriate iconic button in the
main toolbar.
   Inserting a simple node into the expression tree is performed by selecting
the exp command from the main toolbar. After selecting the exp command, a
node is inserted and a textbox for specifying the simple expression appears
within the node. According to grammar rules, simple expressions may be
constants from a domain, variables, or function calls. A combo box positioned
on the upper-right corner is aimed to assist a user to select an appropriate
attribute, or a function from the IIS*Case repository.
Example 7. Suppose the following domain complex expression has to be
specified by means of Visual Editor:
                          VALUE >= 5 AND VALUE <= 10.
  A user needs first to insert a complex node for AND operator, and then two
descendant complex nodes, one for ">=" and the other for "<=" operators.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                371
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


Below the ">=" complex node, he or she needs to insert two simple nodes,
one for variable VALUE, and the other for a constant 5. In a similar way, two
simple nodes are to be defined below the "<=" complex node, one for VALUE,
and the other for 10.
  Expression Editor always keeps Visual Editor and Text Editor
synchronized. When a user creates and validates an expression by means of
Visual Editor, the expression will be also shown in its full syntax in Text Editor.
Also, when a user creates and validates an expression by means of Text
Editor, the corresponding expression tree will be shown in Visual Editor
automatically.



5.    Validation of Check Expressions

Expression Editor provides validation of check expressions. Parser is created
by means of the ANTRL 4.0 tool. ANTRL enables a user to formally specify
grammar. Furthermore, it supports transformation of grammar specifications
into the program code of a parser for target programming environment. As a
result, it is obtained a recursive-descent parser expressed in a program code
that is human-readable and easily customizable. [18].
   According to the specified language definition presented in Section 3,
ANTLR is used to generate Java program code of a parser that checks
whether sentences created by Expression Editor conform to the language
specification.
   ANTLR generally provides amending grammar rules by adding source
program code, i.e. code snippets to the grammar definition. Then, such code
snippets are inserted into the program code of a generated parser, "as is". In
our case, grammar rules for check expressions are amended by inserting
code snippets that translate input sentences into an XML specification, and
perform some semantic analysis, at the same time. In this way, apart from
syntax validation, Expression Editor provides some semantic analysis. For
example, check constraints may contain variables that reference members of
a tuple or choice domain. The semantic analyzer verifies if reference to a
tuple or choice member is valid, by seeking the appropriate domain
specifications from the IIS*Case repository. Currently, type checking is not
supported, at all. It is because the domain specification in our repository
model still does not provide specification of allowed operators over a domain.
Example 8. In Table 4 two grammar rules for domain check expressions are
presented. These rules contain code snippets that provide performing
semantic analysis and creating a node in the appropriate XML specification.
The grammar rules are specified in ANTLR notation.




372                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                           Business Applications

Table 4. Grammar rules for domain check expressions containing code snippets
sentence returns [String val]
@init{ tmp = "";}
:
tmp = expression
{val="<block name=\"Expression\" group=\"1\">"+ tmp+"</block>";
val = val.replaceAll("><",">\n<") + "\n\n";}
;

domain_ref
@init{ tmp = "";}
: value ( '.' tmp = memberName )?
{checkMember(tmp);}
;

   A code snippet that provides creating a node in the XML specification of a
check expression is included in the sentence grammar rule in Table 4. It is
given as follows:
{val = "<block name=\"Expression\" group=\"-1\">" + tmp +
                                                     "</block>";
val = val.replaceAll("><",">\n<") + "\n\n";}
   A code snippet that provides performing semantic analysis is included in
the domain_ref grammar rule in Table 4. It is given as follows:
                              {checkMember(tmp);}
   When member name is identified, the snippet verifies if a reference to a
tuple or choice member is valid, by seeking the appropriate tuple or choice
domain specifications from the IIS*Case repository.
   Apart from being used for a semantic analysis, XML specifications of check
expressions may also be used to provide further necessary transformations of
check constraints. Our future research work is oriented towards providing a
chain of transformations that result in PSM specifications of check constraints,
expressed as the SQL/DDL program code.
   The main idea how to design the transformation process from check
expressions specified at the level of PIMs to the SQL/DDL program code is as
follows. The process should be generally organized in two phases. By our
methodology ([10], [13]), in the first phase, a set of form types representing a
PIM model of a conceptual database schema is transformed into a relational
database schema. Accordingly, all the constraints specified at the conceptual
PIM level should be transformed into the equivalent relational database
schema constraints. Therefore, each component type check expression
specified at the level of a PIM, should be transformed into the one or more
appropriate check or extended check expressions ([12]) defined at the level of
the corresponding relation schemes. It is an issue how to create and
implement an algorithm that will (i) provide inference problem solving for
check expressions and (ii) preserve logical equivalency during




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                373
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


transformations of component type check constraints. In this phase, domain
and attribute check expressions remain unchanged.
   A relational database schema generated in the first phase is still technology
independent of any particular DBMS. Therefore, in the second phase, it is
transformed into the SQL/DDL specification justified to the syntax of a chosen
DBMS or ANSI SQL standard ([1]). Accordingly, each check expression
defined at the level of a sole domain, attribute or a relation scheme, should be
transformed into a corresponding SQL/DDL check constraint. Such a transfor-
mation is easily possible because of using a syntax for our check expressions
that is very similar to the syntax for expressions in SQL check constraints. It is
an issue here how to transform check expressions that contain references to
the members of tuple or choice domains if a target DBMS does not support
necessary object-relational concepts. On the other hand, with respect to the
current level of supporting ANSI SQL standard by commercial DBMSs,
extended check constraints in a relational database schema may only be
transformed into the SQL code of a target DBMS that includes triggers and
stored procedures.



6.    Modeling Complex Functionalities in IIS*Case

Software development in IIS*Case is organized through projects. Each project
in IIS*Case is further organized trough application systems and represented
by a project tree. A set of fundamental specifications, comprising domains,
attributes, inclusion dependencies, and program units is associated to each
project. Fundamental specifications are independent of any application
system given in a project. IIS*Case provides the following program unit
concepts from the class of fundamental concepts necessary to express
complex application functionalities at the level of PIMs: (i) Function; (ii)
Package; and (iii) Event. A part of IIS*Case project tree representing these
concepts is presented in Fig. 3.
   A concept of a function is used to specify complex functionalities. Functions
in IIS*Case are defined at the level of a project, and may be referenced from
various IIS*Case specifications. A concept of a function is presented in the
following text in more details.
   A package is a collection of arbitrary selected functions defined in IIS*Case
repository. Usually, packages are organized in a "thematic" way. Depending
on a selected layer for the package deployment in multi-tier distributed
software architecture, at the level of PIMs, we differentiate between database
server, application server and client packages. Database server packages are
to be deployed at the database server layer. The analogous is for application
server and client packages.




374                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications




Fig. 3. A part of IIS*Case Project Tree.

   A concept of event is used at the level of PIMs, to represent any software
event that may trigger some action under a specified condition. We also
differentiate between database server, application server and client events.
Database server events may be database triggers or exceptions. Application
server and client events may be: keyboard events, mouse events, or
exceptions. Each event should be associated to a PIM specification. For
example, a database trigger should be associated to a relation scheme. A
keyboard event may be associated to a form type, component type, or an
attribute of a component type. A concept of event is not fully implemented in
IIS*Case yet. Its full implementation is a matter of further research.
   A formal specification of a function in IIS*Case includes the following:
x Function name that is unique in the IIS*Case project;
x List of formal parameters (i.e. arguments);
x Return value type; and
x Function body.
In Fig. 4 it is presented the IIS*Case screen form for specifying a function with
the list of formal parameters and the return value type. The "Specification"
button invokes the Function Editor tool aimed at formal specification of the
function body. Function Editor is presented in the next section.
   For each function, an arbitrary number of formal parameters may be
defined. Each formal parameter is specified by the following properties: (i)
sequence number defining a position of the parameter in the list; (ii) name; (iii)
reference to IIS*Case domain defining a data type of a parameter; (iv) default
value; and (v) type, where possible parameter types are: input (In), output
(Out) and input/output (InOut), with a usual meaning inherited from various




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                375
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


programming languages. Return value type is a reference to the domain
previously defined in IIS*Case repository.




Fig. 4. A screen form for specification of a function, its formal parameters and a return
type.

   Function body is specified by means of PIM concepts that are mostly
inherited from the third generation languages, particularly database
procedural languages, and structural programming paradigm. Function body
is a tree structure comprising blocks, declarations, statements, and
comments. We differentiate between execution blocks and declaration blocks.
Execution blocks may include nested declaration and execution blocks. In this
way, multi-level nesting of blocks is provided. The following concepts are
provided for specifying a function body:
x Sequential structures defining sequences of statements, declarations or
  comments;
x Declaration blocks that represent sequences of various declarations and
  comments;
x Declarations of local types, variables, constants, functions, cursors and
  exceptions;
x Execution blocks that represent sequences of embedded blocks, various
  statements and comments;
x Iteration structures with FOR, DO-WHILE, and WHILE-DO statements;
x Selection structures with IF-THEN-ELSE and ELSEIF-THEN-ELSE
  statements;
x Exception handler structure with TRY, CATCH, and FINALLY statements;
x Simple statements, like various kind of expressions and assignment
  statements; and
x Single-line comments denoted as /* */.




376                                    ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

Despite that these concepts are mostly inherited from the third generation
languages, they are syntactically independent of any particular programming
language. Therefore, function specifications in IIS*Case are platform
independent.
   A specified function may be referenced many times in the same IIS*Case
project. Currently, a function may be referenced in:
x Declarations and expressions of other IIS*Case functions;
x Packages, to express an inclusion of the function into a package;
x Events, to express the activity of an event associated to a PIM
  specification;
x Logical expressions of domain check constraints, attribute check
  constraints and component type check constraints; or
x Specifications of derived attributes.



7.     The Function Editor Tool

Function Editor is the IIS*Case tool that provides repository based
specification of a function body in a visually oriented way. The main screen
form of Function Editor is presented in Fig. 5.




Fig. 5. The main screen form of Function Specification Editor.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                377
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


    By means of Function Editor, a function body is represented as a tree,
whose nodes represent blocks, declarations, statements, or comments. Tree
Structure Navigator is placed on the left hand side of the Function Editor
screen form from Fig. 5, while the complete specification of a function body is
represented in a panel placed in the central part of the screen form from Fig.
5. At the bottom of the screen form a message panel is placed.
    Function Editor provides common tree operations, like creating a new node,
removing an existing node, or reconnecting (cut & paste) a node in the tree. A
notion of a current node in Tree Structure Navigator is recognized and all the
tree operations are performed in the context of the current node. The current
node is marked by a different color. Tree operations are available from the
main menu, horizontal and vertical toolbars, as well as from the right-mouse-
click context menu.
    Creating a new node is a context sensitive operation. It is performed by
selecting an appropriate toolbar option or "Blocks & Statements" menu option.
A designer may select only one of the options that are available in the context
of the current node. In this way, he or she specifies the type of the node being
created. A list of all possible node types with their descriptions is given in
Table 5 included in Section 10, Appendix.
    By a context sensitive selection of options for node types that are available
in the context of current node, Function Editor assists a designer in creating
valid function specifications. For example, if the current node represents a
FOR statement, a creation of ELSE descendant node is unavailable.
According to common structural programming rules imposed by general
purpose procedural languages, Function Editor only allows the combinations
of node types that make sense in specifying a function body. In this way,
Function Editor just allows building valid structures of a function body.
    Besides, Function Editor also provides a syntax and semantic analysis tool.
A designer may use the tool during the whole process of creating function
specifications, just by selecting an appropriate toolbar option. The syntax
analysis also checks validity of the structure of function body specification. As
it concerns semantic analysis, currently Function Editor only checks variable
and constant declarations, if specified data type is a reference to a domain
specification from the IIS*Case repository. Type checking is not supported, at
all. It is because the domain specification in our repository model still does not
provide specification of allowed operators over a domain.



8.    Conclusion

Commercial CASE tools that provide modeling conceptual database schema
specifications by means of ER data model and their transforming into a re-
lational data model either provide only partial specifications of check
constraints at the conceptual level, and/or provide a usage of standard SQL
syntax for that purposes. Therefore, check constraints are usually fully defined
at the level of an implementation database schema. On the contrary, in our




378                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                           Business Applications

approach, check constraints in the IIS*Case tool are defined at the level of a
conceptual database schema as a PIM model. For these purposes, we
developed a DSL and the Check Expression Editor tool to create and parse
check expressions defined in a platform independent way. In this way, a
designer may specify check constraints using problem domain concepts, in a
visually oriented way.
   Besides, by our approach, function specifications, which may be referenced
from check constraint expressions as well as from the other IIS*Case
specifications, are defined at the level of a conceptual specification of an IS,
as a PIM model. For these purposes, we developed a specialized tool, named
Function Editor, by means of it is possible to create and analyze function
specifications defined in a platform independent way. In this way, a designer
may specify functions using not only programming concepts, but also problem
domain concepts, in a visually oriented way.
   Among all, our current or future research and development efforts are
oriented towards the following:
x Development of the algorithms providing transformations of check
  constraint specifications created at the level of form types as PIMs, to the
  equivalent specifications at the level of an implementation database
  schema (usually expressed by the relational data model), and then to the
  executable PSM specifications expressed as the SQL/DDL program code;
x Development of a DSL for an equivalent representation of the current
  repository based function specifications at the level of PIMs;
x Extensions of the IIS*Case repository definition and the appropriate
  specifications (like event specifications) by new concepts, so as to make
  better foundation for (i) semantic analysis of check constraint expressions;
  and (ii) using function specifications in specifying business application logic,
  as well as their syntax and semantic analysis;
x Development of the algorithms providing transformations of function
  specifications created at the level of PIMs, to the equivalent executable
  PSM specifications expressed in a target programming environment and in
  the context of generated business applications; and
x Using the Meta-Object Facility Specification (MOF) in order to raise our
  repository based DSL specifications at meta-meta abstraction level.

Acknowledgment
A part of the research presented in this paper was supported by Ministry of
Science and Technological Development of Republic of Serbia, Grant TR-
13029, Title: A Development of an Intelligent Environment for the Design and
Implementation of Information Systems.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               379
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


References

1.  Aleksiü, S., Lukoviü, I., Mogin, P., Govedarica, M.: A Generator of SQL Schema
    Specifications. Computer Science and Information Systems (ComSIS),
    Consortium of Faculties of Serbia and Montenegro, Novi Sad, Serbia, ISSN:1820-
    0214, Vol.4, No. 2, 79-98. (2007)
2. ARTech. DeKlaritTM (TheModel-Driven Tool for Microsoft Visual Studio 2005).
    Chicago, USA (June, 2009). [Online]. Available: http://www.deklarit.com.
3. Berti, S., Paterno, F., Santoro, C.: Natural Development of Ubiquitous Interfaces.
    Communications of the ACM (CACM), Association for Computing Machinery,
    USA, Vol. 47, No. 9, 63-64. (2004)
4. Burnett, M., Cook, C., Rothermel, G.: End-User Software Engineering.
    Communications of the ACM (CACM), Association for Computing Machinery,
    USA, Vol. 47, No. 9, 53-58. (2004)
5. Choobinch, J., Mannio, V. M., Nunamaker, F. J., Konsynski, R. B.: An Expert
    Database Design System Based on Analysis of Forms. IEEE Transactions on
    Software Engineering, Vol.14, No 2, 242-253. (1988)
6. Deursen van, A., Klint, P. Visser, J.: Domain-Specific Languages: An Annotated
    Bibliography. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Association for Computing Machinery, USA,
    Vol. 35, No. 6, 26-36. (2000)
7. Diet, J., Lochovsky, F.: Interactive Specification and Integration of User Views
    Using Forms. In: Proceedings of the Eight International Conference on Entity-
    Relationship Approach, Toronto, Canada, 171-185. (1989)
8. João Pereira, M., Mernik, M., Cruz, D., Rangel Henriques, P.: Program
    Comprehension for Domain-Specific Languages. Computer Science and
    Information Systems (ComSIS), Vol. 5, No. 2, 1-17. (2008)
9. Kleppe, A., Warmer, J., Bast, W.: MDA Explained: The Model Driven Architecture:
    Practice and Promise, Addison Wesley. (2003)
10. Lukoviü, I., Mogin, P., Paviüeviü, J., Ristiü, S.: An Approach to Developing
    Complex Database Schemas Using Form Types. Software: Practice and
    Experience, John Wiley & Sons Inc, Hoboken, USA, DOI: 10.1002/spe.820, Vol.
    37, No. 15, 1621-1656. (2007)
11. Lukoviü, I., Ristiü, S., Aleksic, S., Popoviü, A.: An Application of the MDSE
    Principles in IIS*Case. In: Proceedings of III Workshop on Model Driven Software
    Engineering (MDSE 2008), Berlin, Germany, TFH, University of Applied Sciences
    Berlin, 53-62. (2008)
12. Lukoviü, I., Ristiü, S., Mogin, P.: On The Formal Specification of Database
    Schema Constraints. In: Proceedings of I Serbian – Hungarian Joint Symposium
    on Intelligent Systems, Subotica, Serbia, 125-136. (2003)
13. Lukoviü, I., Ristiü, S., Mogin, P., Paviceviü, J.: Database Schema Integration
    Process – A Methodology and Aspects of Its Applying. Novi Sad Journal of
    Mathematics (Formerly Review of Research, Faculty of Science, Mathematic
    Series), Serbia, Vol. 36, No. 1, 115-150. (2006)
14. Mernik, M., Heering, J., Sloane, M. A.: When and How to Develop Domain-
    Specific Languages. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), Association for Computing
    Machinery, USA, Vol. 37, No. 4, 316-344. (2005)
15. Mogin, P., Lukoviü, I., Karadžiü, Z.: Relational Database Schema Design and
    Application Generating using IIS*CASE Tool. In: Proceedings of International
    Conference on Technical Informatics, Timisoara, Romania, Vol. 5, 49-58. (1994)
16. Object Management Group: MDA Guide. Version 1.0.1, Volume 1, document
    omg/03-06-01. (2003)




380                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
     A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                            Business Applications

17. Object Management Group: Unified Modeling Language Specification. Version
    1.4.2, document formal/05-05-01. (2005)
18. Parr, T.: The Definitive ANTLR Reference: Building Domain-Specific Languages.
    The Pragmatic Programmers, USA. (2007).
19. Paviüeviü, J., Lukoviü, I., Mogin, P., Govedarica, M.: Information System Design
    and Prototyping Using Form Types. In: Proceedings of INSTICC I International
    Conference on Software and Data Technologies (ICSOFT), Setubal, Portugal, Vol.
    2, 157-160. (2006)
20. Reppening, A., Ioannidou, A.: Agent Based End-User Development.
    Communications of the ACM (CACM), Association for Computing Machinery,
    USA, Vol. 47, No. 9, 43-46. (2004)
21. Rumbaugh, J., Jacobson, I.: The Unified Modeling Language Reference Manual.
    Addison-Wesley, USA. (1999)
22. Schmidt, D. C.: Model-driven engineering. IEEE Computer, Vol.39, No.2, 25-31.
    (2006)
23. Seidewitz, E.: What models mean. IEEE Software, Vol. 20, No. 5, 26-32. (2003)
24. Stanley, E., Mogin, P., Andreae, P.: S.E.A.L.-A Query Language for Entity-
    Association Queries. In Proceedings of the 20th Australasian Database
    Conference (ADC 2009), Wellington, New Zealand, Vol 92, 67-76. (2009)
25. Sutcliffe, A., Mehandjiev, N.: End-User Development. Communications of the ACM
    (CACM), Association for Computing Machinery, USA, Vol. 47, No. 9, 31-32.
    (2004)



Appendix

In Table 5 it is presented a list of all possible Function Editor node types with
their descriptions.

Table 5. A list of node types available when creating a new node.
     Node Type                                 Description
                          A new execution block as a sequence of statements,
                          blocks and comments is created. The node is named
Execution Block           EXECUTION_BLOCK. In its context, it is possible to
                          create new subordinated nodes, and therefore such a
                          node is called the complex node.
                          A new node named FOR and representing the
                          counting FOR structure is created. Four new
                          subordinated nodes are automatically created,
                          denoted as: (i) Begin, (ii) Condition, (iii) Step, and (iv)
FOR structure             FOR_BODY. The first three are text items that define:
                          start value, end value and the step of a FOR program
                          counter. These are the simple nodes, because they
                          cannot have any subordinated nodes. FOR_BODY is
                          a complex node. It represents a sequence of state-
                          ments and blocks defining the body of a FOR
                          structure.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                  381
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


                         A new node named WHILE and representing the
                         WHILE-DO structure is created. Two new
                         subordinated nodes are automatically created,
WHILE-DO structure       denoted as: (i) Condition and (ii) WHILE_BODY.
                         Condition is a text item that defines "pre-while" test
                         condition. It is a simple node. WHILE_BODY is a
                         complex node. It represents a sequence of statements
                         and blocks defining the body of a WHILE-DO
                         structure.
                         A new node named DO_WHILE and representing the
                         DO-WHILE structure is created. Two new
                         subordinated nodes are automatically created,
DO-WHILE structure       denoted as: (i) DO_WHILE_BODY and (ii) Condition.
                         Condition is a text item that defines "post-while" test
                         condition. It is a simple node. DO_WHILE_BODY is a
                         complex node. It represents a sequence of statements
                         and blocks defining the body of a DO-WHILE
                         structure.
                         A new node named IF and representing the IF
                         selection structure is created. Three new subordinated
                         nodes are automatically created, denoted as: (i)
IF-THEN-ELSE             Condition, (ii) THEN, and (iii) ELSE, as an optional
structure                node. Condition is a text item that defines IF test
                         condition. It is a simple node. THEN and ELSE are
                         complex nodes. They represent sequences of
                         statements and blocks defining the main body and the
                         alternative body of an IF structure.
ELSE clause              A new node named ELSE in the context of an IF
                         selection structure is created, with the same role as it
                         would be created initially trough an IF-THEN-ELSE
                         structure.
                         A new node named ELSEIF in the context of an IF
                         selection structure is created with a usual meaning.
ELSEIF structure         Three new subordinated nodes are automatically
                         created, denoted as: (i) Condition, (ii) THEN, and (iii)
                         ELSE, as an optional node. Condition is a text item that
                         defines ELSEIF test condition. It is a simple node. THEN
                         and ELSE are complex nodes. They represent
                         sequences of statements and blocks defining the main
                         body and the alternative body of an ELSEIF structure.




382                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                           Business Applications

                        Three complex nodes named TRY, CATCH and FINAL-
                        LY are automatically created to specify an exception
                        handler structure. CATCH and FINALLY nodes are the
                        optional ones. They represent sequences of statements
                        and blocks defining the exception handler. In the scope
TRY-CATCH-              of CATCH, two new subordinated nodes are
FINALLY                 automatically created, denoted as: (i) Exception and (ii)
structure               CATCH_BLOCK. Exception is a simple node. It is a text
                        item that references a previously declared exception.
                        CATCH_BLOCK is a complex node. It represents a
                        sequence of statements and blocks aimed to handle a
                        raised exception. Multiple nesting of TRY nodes is
                        allowed. In the scope of a current TRY node it is possible
                        to create many CATCH or FINALLY nodes.
Statement               A new node representing a simple statement is
                        created in the context of a block. It is a simple node
                        structured as a text item. Currently, there are two
                        types of simple statements: assignments and
                        expressions. In the future research, we also plan to
                        embed SQL statements.
                        A new declaration block as a sequence of
                        declarations and comments is created. The node is
Declaration Block       named DECLARATION. It is a complex node. In its
                        context, it is possible to create new declarations of
                        types, variables, constants, cursors, exceptions, and
                        local functions.
                        A new declaration is created in the context of a
Declaration             declaration block. A declaration is a simple node. It
                        represents a text item that defines particular
                        declaration of a type, variable, constant, cursor,
                        exception or function inclusion.
                        A new node named LOCAL_FUNCTION is created in
                        the scope of a declaration block. It represents a
                        declaration of a local function. Three new subordinated
                        nodes are automatically created, denoted as: (i) Function
LOCAL_FUNCTION          Name,         (ii)     ARGUMENTS,            and       (iii)
declaration             LOCAL_FUNCTION_BODY. Function Name is a simple
                        node. It is a text item that defines local function name.
                        ARGUMENTS is a complex node. It comprises
                        declarations of local function arguments only. LOCAL_-
                        FUNCTION_BODY is a complex node. It represents a
                        whole function body of a local function being declared.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                                 383
Ivan Lukoviü, Aleksandar Popoviü, Jovo Mostiü, and Sonja Ristiü


                         A new node in the context of an ARGUMENTS node
                         in a LOCAL_FUNCTION declaration is created. It is a
Local Function           simple node structured as a text item. It represents a
Argument                 formal argument of a local function given with the
                         name and an association to a domain from the
                         repository.
                         A new node in the context of a block is created. It is a
Comment                  simple node structured as a text item. It represents a
                         single-line comment.




Ivan Lukoviü received his M.Sc. (5 year, former Diploma) degree in
Informatics from the Faculty of Military and Technical Sciences in Zagreb in
1990. He completed his Mr (2 year) degree at the University of Belgrade,
Faculty of Electrical Engineering in 1993, and his Ph.D. at the University of
Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences in 1996. Currently, he works as a
Full Professor at the Faculty of Technical Sciences at the University of Novi
Sad, where he lectures in several Computer Science and Informatics courses.
His research interests are related to Database Systems and Software
Engineering. He is the author or coauthor of over 70 papers, 4 books, and 30
industry projects and software solutions in the area.


Aleksandar Popoviü graduated from Faculty of Science at the University of
Montenegro. He completed his Mr (2 year) degree at the University of Novi
Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences. Currently, he is a Ph.D. student and
teaching assistant at the University of Montenegro, Faculty of Science. He
assists in teaching several Computer Science and Informatics courses. His
research interests include Software Engineering, Database Systems and
Domain Specific Languages.


Jovo Mostiü received his M.Sc. (4 year, former Diploma) degree from the
University of Montenegro, Faculty of Science in Podgorica. He completed his
Mr (2 year) degree at the University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical
Sciences. Currently, he works as an IT project manager in Erste &
Steiermärkische Bank in Podgorica. His research interests are related to
Information Systems, Database Systems and Software Engineering.




384                                  ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010
    A Tool for Modeling Form Type Check Constraints and Complex Functionalities of
                                                           Business Applications

Sonja Ristiü is holding a position of an associate professor at the University
of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences, Serbia. She received two
bachelor degrees (4 year, former Diploma) from University of Novi Sad, one in
Mathematics, Faculty of Science in 1983, and the other in Economics from
Faculty of Economics, in 1989. She also received her Mr (2 year) and Ph.D.
degrees in Informatics, both from Faculty of Economics, in 1994 and 2003,
respectively. From 1984 till 1990 she worked with the Novi Sad Cable
Company "NOVKABEL" – Factory of Electronic Computers. From 1990 till
2006 she was with High School of Professional Business Studies -Novi Sad,
and since 2006 she has been with the Faculty of Technical Sciences,
University of Novi Sad. Her research interests are related to Database
Systems and Software Engineering. She is the author or coauthor of over 40
papers in the area.


Received: November 12, 2009; Accepted: January 27, 2010.




ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, Special Issue, April 2010                               385
CIP ± ǲȈȚȈȓȖȋȐȏȈȞȐȯȈțȗțȉȓȐȒȈȞȐȯȐ
ǵȈȘȖȌȕȈȉȐȉȓȐȖȚȍȒȈǹȘȉȐȯȍǩȍȖȋȘȈȌ

004

     COMPUTER Science and Information
Systems : the International journal /
Editor-in-Chief 0LUMDQD,YDQRYLü. ± Vol. 7,
No 2 (2010) -       . ± Novi Sad (7UJ'2EUDGRYLüD
3): ComSIS Consortium, 2010 - (Belgrade
: Sigra star). ±30 cm

3ROXJRGLãQMH± Tekst na engleskom jeziku

ISSN 1820-0214 = Computer Science and
Information Systems
COBISS.SR-ID 112261644




&RYHUGHVLJQ9âWDYOMDQLQ
Library Administration: M. Petkoviü
Printed by: Sigra star, Beograd


                                            ComSIS Vol. 7, No. 2, April 2010
