In A.F. Blackwell & E. Bilotta (Eds). Proc. PPIG 12                                        Pages 137-154


             A Cognitive Dimensions Questionnaire Optimised for Users


                               Alan F. Blackwell and Thomas R.G. Green

                                         Computer Laboratory
                                         Cambridge University
                                      Alan.Blackwell@cl.cam.ac.uk

                                     Computer Based Learning Unit
                                         University of Leeds
                                     Thomas.Green@ndirect.co.uk



Keywords: POP-III.C. All Cognitive Dimensions; POP-V.B. Questionnaire Analysis


Abstract

The Cognitive Dimensions of Notations framework (CDs) provides a powerful vocabulary for
discussing the usability of programming languages, tools and environments. Although originally
proposed as a discussion tool for designers, they have recently been used to design questionnaires
intended for system users evaluating the usability of the programming tools they use (Kadoda et al.,
1999) We extend their approach: rather than develop questionnaires tailored to specific systems, we
propose a generalised questionnaire in which the definitions of the CDs themselves are offered to the
users, and respondents can choose for themselves the features of the system that they wish to
criticise. This questionnaire has been completed by an extremely diverse range of users, showing that
a generalised CDs questionnaire indeed a suitable tool for user evaluation. Not surprisingly, some
problems emerged as well.

Introduction

The Cognitive Dimensions of Notations framework (CDs) provides a powerful vocabulary for
discussing the usability of information artefacts, especially programming languages, tools and. It was
originally proposed as a broad-brush discussion tool, offering a vocabulary with which to discuss the
usability tradeoffs that occur when designing programming environments (Green 1989, Green &
Petre 1996, Green & Blackwell 1998).
As originally conceived it was expected that the evaluation would be performed by somebody who
understood the framework well and also understood the system well. That somebody might be the
designer, although it has to be admitted that designers usually have priorities in design rather than
evaluation; or that somebody might be an HCI expert, which is how most HCI evaluation schemes
work. Green (1989) expressed pious hopes of enriching the conceptual vocabulary of choosers and
users by getting them to use the concepts of viscosity etc., but the problem is how to achieve that
goal. Just telling designers and HCI folk about CDs is hardly likely to achieve it.
Last year at PPIG Kadoda et al. (1999) took a step toward that goal by introducing a questionnaire
approach in which the evaluation was performed by system users rather than by designers or HCI
specialists. That has to be a good idea. Not only does it give users a new set of ideas in such a way
that they will be motivated to grasp them and use them, but it also means the users do all the work.
The questionnaire approach seems to have been in the air last year – Collins and Fung (2000)
describe a plan for a similar study, though details have not yet emerged.
The present paper aims to take another step along that road.


12th Workshop of the Psychology of Programming Interest Group, Cozenza Italy, April 2000    www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                                                ii

Kadoda et al.’s questionnaire only presented those CDs that they thought were relevant to the system
under consideration, and to make it easier for the users to pick up the ideas, they paraphrased those
CDs in terms of the system under consideration. There may be a problem here: filtering the CDs
constrains the respondents to commenting on the CDs that the researcher or designer has already
identified, and thereby mixes the HCI expert’s evaluation (in choosing the subset) with the users’
evaluations, so the data will not be a pure account of what the users thought. This is particularly
dangerous when the questionnaire designer is also the designer of the system, and will quite possibly
completely overlook aspects that are very important to the users.
And of course, if a different questionnaire has to be designed for each system, then the evaluators still
have to do some of the work, rather than leaving it all to the users.
So we have set out to develop a questionnaire which presents all the CDs, and lets the users decide
which ones are relevant. We have also attempted to present the CDs in general terms, applicable to all
information artefacts, rather than presenting descriptions specialised to the system under
consideration. On the plus side, this means (i) the users do all the work, (ii) the data only reflects
their opinions, and (iii) the same questionnaire can be used for all information artefacts. On the down
side, it means that the resulting questionnaire is longer (since it has to present all the CDs, not just a
subset) and possibly harder to understand, since the CDs are presented in general terms.
The CDs framework is not, unfortunately, a stationary target. Green and Blackwell (1998) go more
deeply into the notion of a ‘sub-device’ than previous publications have done, and we have taken
account of that in the questionnaire.
In this paper, then, we describe our questionnaire. We have some preliminary results, which will help
to establish whether we are making progress towards two important requirements of the approach we
have taken.
Clarity: The questionnaire must explain CDs very clearly. (It has to be admitted that the academic
presentations existing are not very clear, partly because the second author is too lazy, dim-witted and
muddle-headed to sort out what he’s trying to say). Our aim in the questionnaire has therefore been to
describe CDs in very simple terms, such that they can be understood by an intelligent user who has a
thoughtful attitude toward his or her work and tools.
Generality. The questionnaire will not make any assumptions about the system under study. It has
not been designed with any specific system in mind, and aims solely to communicate CDs clearly.
We have tested this objective in a pilot study involving an extremely wide range of users of
information artefacts, using many different systems for different applications. Furthermore, the
questionnaire will not make any assumptions about the type of activity that the user is engaged in. It
will identify the nature of the user’s work in a way that allows sensible evaluation of the responses by
system evaluators.

The User Oriented Questionnaire

Our experimental questionnaire is divided into five main sections, which will be described separately
below. The questionnaire form is entitled “Thinking about Notational Systems”, and there is a brief
preface describing the philosophy of cognitive dimensions analysis from the point of view of users:
     “This questionnaire collects your views about how easy it is to use some kind of notational system. Our definition of
“notational systems” includes many different ways of storing and using information – books, different ways of using pencil and
paper, libraries or filing systems, software programs, computers, and smaller electronic devices. The questionnaire includes a
series of questions that encourage you to think about the ways you need to use one particular notational system, and whether
it helps you to do the things you need”.

The next four sections of the questionnaire ask about the user’s level of experience with the system,
define technical terms that are used in the rest of the questionnaire, ask the user to consider the
activity for which they use the system and the different components of the system, then present each
of the cognitive dimensions, encouraging the user to make comments about usability aspects of the
system that are related to that dimension. Finally, there is an optional section that the user can fill in

PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                                      www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                                                 iii

to comment on other notations within the system. Each of these sections is described in more detail
below. The titles in this paper are the same titles used in each section of the questionnaire.

Section 1 - Background information (half page)
The aim of this section is to establish whether the respondent is an expert user of the system under
evaluation, and whether he or she has experience of other similar systems. The comments in the rest
of the questionnaire can be given weight in accordance with the amount of experience, and the
critical expertise that results from using a number of similar systems. This section asks the following
questions:
    •    “What is the name of the system?”

    •    “How long have you been using it?”
    •    “Do you consider yourself proficient in its use?”

    •    “Have you used other similar systems? (If so, please name them)”


   Section 2 – Definitions (1 page)
   This section aims to describe the theoretical assumptions of the CDs framework in general and
simple terms. It is based on the tutorial presentation of CDs by Green and Blackwell (1998).
    “You might need to think carefully to answer the questions in the next sections, so we have provided some definitions and
an example to get you started:”
    “Product: The product is the ultimate reason why you are using the notational system – what things happen as an end
result, or what things will be produced as a result of using the notational system. This event or object is called the product. Any
product that needs a notation to describe it usually has some complex structure.”
    “Notation: The notation is how you communicate with the system – you provide information in some special format to
describe the end result that you want, and the notation provides information that you can read. Notations have a structure that
corresponds in some way to the structure of the product they describe. They also have parts (components, aspects etc.) that
correspond in some way to parts of the product.”
     “Notations can include text, pictures, diagrams, tables, special symbols or various combinations of these. Some systems
include multiple notations. These might be quite similar to each other – for example when using a typewriter, the text that it
produces is just letters and characters, while the notation on the keys that you press tells you exactly how to get the result you
want. In other cases, a system might include some notations that are hard for humans to produce or to read. For example
when you use a telephone the notation on the buttons is a simple arrangement of digits, but the noises you hear aren’t so easy
to interpret (different dialling tones for each number, clicks, and ringing tones). A telephone with a display therefore provides a
further notation that is easier for the human user to understand.”
    “Sub-devices: Complex systems can include several specialised notations to help with a specific part of the job. Some of
these might not normally be considered to be part of the system, for example when you stick a Post-It note on your computer
screen to remind you what to write in a word processor document.”
    “There are two kinds of these sub-devices.
    •    The Post-It note is an example of a helper device. Another example is when you make notes of telephone numbers
         on the back of an envelope: the complete system is the telephone plus the paper notes – if you didn’t have some kind
         of helper device like the envelope, the telephone would be much less useful.
    •    A redefinition device changes the main notation in some way – such as defining a keyboard shortcut, a quick-dial
         code on a telephone, or a macro function. The redefinition device allows you to define these shortcuts, redefine them,
         delete them and so on.”
     “Note that both helper devices and redefinition devices need their own notations that are separate from the main notation
of the system. We therefore ask you to consider them separately in the rest of this questionnaire.”
    “To review how we intend to use these terms, consider the example of a word processor. The product of using the word
processor is the printed letter on paper. The notation is the way that the letter looks on the screen – on modern word
processors it looks pretty similar to what gets printed out, but this wasn't always the case. If you want to find and replace a
particular word throughout a document, you can call up a helper device, the search and replace function, usually with its own
window. This window has its own special notation – the way that you have to write the text to be found and replaced, as well
as buttons that you can click on to find whole words, or to find the word in upper and lower case etc.”


   Section 3 – Parts of your system (1 page)
   This section first reviews the previous material, asking the respondent to instantiate the technical
definitions in the context of the system they are evaluating:
    •    “What task or activity do you use the system for?”
    •    “What is the product of using the system?”
    •    “What is the main notation of the system?”


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                                          www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                                           iv

    The respondent is then asked to characterise the type of activity that they engage in when using
this notation. In most programming-like tasks, there will not be a single activity type, but rather a
spread of different activities that varies for different users (analysts, testers, coders etc.). We
construct this profile in terms of estimated percentage of time allocated to the different activities
presented earlier in (Blackwell & Green 1999).
   “When using the system, what proportion of your time (as a rough percentage) do you spend:
   •   Searching for information within the notation […]%
   •   Translating substantial amounts of information from some other source into the system […]%
   •   Adding small bits of information to a description that you have previously created […]%
   •   Reorganising and restructuring descriptions that you have previously created […]%
   •   Playing around with new ideas in the notation, without being sure what will result […]%”

    Finally in this section we ask the respondent to identify other notations within the system, if they
have already noticed them. There are further opportunities to identify other notational sub-devices
later in the questionnaire.
   “Are there any helper devices? Please list them here, and fill out a separate copy of section 5 for each one.”
   “Are there any redefinition devices? Please list them here, and fill out a separate copy of section 5 for each one.”

   Section 4 – Questions about the main notation (3 pages)
    This section of the questionnaire simply summarises the cognitive dimensions, presenting them in
terms of the notational definitions given earlier, and encouraging the respondent to identify features
of the system that are relevant to each dimension in terms of their work. Each description in this
paper is prefaced with the name of the CD that it describes, but that is for the benefit of academic
readers familiar with CDs – the questionnaire itself simply groups each set of questions into a single
box so that the respondent sees they are related. The questionnaire does not include the familiar name
of the CD, but only an identification code for convenience in later analysis.
    We believe that these descriptions, although simple, are true to the intention of previous
publications on CDs. In fact, both of us have used these descriptions, rather than quoting earlier
publications, when teaching undergraduate and postgraduate university courses on CDs within the
last year. We hope that these descriptions may also provide a useful quick reference for other
researchers, although of course they do not adequately describe the full implications or application of
any of the CDs – a better reference for that purpose is (Green & Blackwell 1998).
   Visibility and Juxtaposability
   •    How easy is it to see or find the various parts of the notation while it is being created or changed? Why?
   •    What kind of things are more difficult to see or find?
   •    If you need to compare or combine different parts, can you see them at the same time? If not, why not?

   Viscosity
   •    When you need to make changes to previous work, how easy is it to make the change? Why?
   •    Are there particular changes that are more difficult or especially difficult to make? Which ones?

   Diffuseness
   •    Does the notation a) let you say what you want reasonably briefly, or b) is it long-winded? Why?
   •    What sorts of things take more space to describe?

   Hard Mental Operations
   •    What kind of things require the most mental effort with this notation?
   •    Do some things seem especially complex or difficult to work out in your head (e.g. when combining several things)?
        What are they?

   Error Proneness
   •    Do some kinds of mistake seem particularly common or easy to make? Which ones?
   •    Do you often find yourself making small slips that irritate you or make you feel stupid? What are some examples?

   Closeness of Mapping
   •    How closely related is the notation to the result that you are describing? Why? (Note that in a sub-device, the result
        may be part of another notation, rather than the end product).
   •    Which parts seem to be a particularly strange way of doing or describing something?

   Role Expressiveness
   •    When reading the notation, is it easy to tell what each part is for in the overall scheme? Why?


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                                        www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                                                v

    •    Are there some parts that are particularly difficult to interpret? Which ones?
    •    Are there parts that you really don’t know what they mean, but you put them in just because it’s always been that
         way? What are they?

    Hidden Dependencies
    •    If the structure of the product means some parts are closely related to other parts, and changes to one may affect the
         other, are those dependencies visible? What kind of dependencies are hidden?
    •    In what ways can it get worse when you are creating a particularly large description?
    •    Do these dependencies stay the same, or are there some actions that cause them to get frozen? If so, what are they?

    Progressive Evaluation
    •    How easy is it to stop in the middle of creating some notation, and check your work so far? Can you do this any time
         you like? If not, why not?
    •    Can you find out how much progress you have made, or check what stage in your work you are up to? If not, why
         not?
    •    Can you try out partially-completed versions of the product? If not, why not?

    Provisionality
    •    Is it possible to sketch things out when you are playing around with ideas, or when you aren’t sure which way to
         proceed? What features of the notation help you to do this?
    •    What sort of things can you do when you don’t want to be too precise about the exact result you are trying to get?


    Premature Commitment
    •    When you are working with the notation, can you go about the job in any order you like, or does the system force you
         to think ahead and make certain decisions first?
    •    If so, what decisions do you need to make in advance? What sort of problems can this cause in your work?

    Consistency
    •    Where there are different parts of the notation that mean similar things, is the similarity clear from the way they
         appear? Please give examples.
    •    Are there places where some things ought to be similar, but the notation makes them different? What are they?


    Secondary Notation
    •    Is it possible to make notes to yourself, or express information that is not really recognised as part of the notation?
    •    If it was printed on a piece of paper that you could annotate or scribble on, what would you write or draw?
    •    Do you ever add extra marks (or colours or format choices) to clarify, emphasise or repeat what is there already? [If
         yes: does this constitute a helper device? If so, please fill in one of the section 5 sheets describing it]

    Abstraction Management
    •    Does the system give you any way of defining new facilities or terms within the notation, so that you can extend it to
         describe new things or to express your ideas more clearly or succinctly? What are they?
    •    Does the system insist that you start by defining new terms before you can do anything else? What sort of things?
    •    If you wrote here, you have a redefinition device: please fill in one of the section 5 sheets describing it.

   Finally we ask two further questions which may evoke usability problems that are not addressed
by any of the dimensions, or that may allow the respondent to express some problem that other
dimensions have reminded them of:
    •    Do you find yourself using this notation in ways that are unusual, or ways that the designer might not have intended?
         If so, what are some examples?
    •    After completing this questionnaire, can you think of obvious ways that the design of the system could be improved?
         What are they? Could it be improved specifically for your own requirements?


   Section 5 – Questions about sub-devices (1 page)
   This final section of the questionnaire is printed on a single page, and respondents are given
several blank copies of this page, so that they can complete as many as they wish. The contents of the
page repeat the material presented earlier in the questionnaire, but in further abbrieviated form. This
further abbreviation is not essential – the first pilot version of the questionnaire simply duplicated the
whole of section 4 several times. However, this meant that respondents who identified a number of
sub-devices quickly got bored with the repetitive nature of the task. In the current version of the
questionnaire we therefore ask respondents only to comment on particularly salient features of this
sub-device, relying on the brief descriptions to remind them of the original CD definitions.
    “Please fill out a copy of this page for each sub-device in the system.”
    “This page is describing (tick one box): a helper device […], or a redefinition device […]. What is its name? What kind of
notation is used in this sub-device?”


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                                        www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                                             vi

     “When using this sub-device, what proportion of the time using it (as a rough percentage) do you spend: Searching for
information […]% Translating substantial amounts of information from some other source into the system […]% Adding small
bits of information to a description that you have previously created […]% Reorganising and restructuring descriptions that you
have previously created […]% Playing around with new ideas in the notation, without being sure what will result […]%”
     “In what ways is the notation in this sub-device different from the main notation? Please tick boxes where there are
differences, and write a few words explaining the difference.”
     •    Is it easy to see different parts?
     •    Is it easy to make changes?
     •    Is the notation succinct or long-winded?
     •    Do some things require hard mental effort?
     •    Is it easy to make errors or slips?
     •    Is the notation closely related to the result?
     •    Is it easy to tell what each part is for?
     •    Are dependencies visible?
     •    Is it easy to stop and check your work so far?
     •    Is it possible to sketch things out?
     •    Can you work in any order you like?
     •    Are any similarities between different parts clear?
     •    Can you make informal notes to yourself?
     •    Can you define new terms or features?
     •    Do you use this notation in unusual ways?
     •    How could the design of the system be improved?


Questionnaire Pilot Study

We have conducted a pilot study using this questionnaire with a very wide range of respondents,
intended to capture the wide variety of notational systems employed by computer users for tasks that
are more or less like conventional programming. The respondents in our pilot study have also
included a wide range of different programming experience, ranging from expert programmers
conducting postdoctoral research in computer science to computer users with no programming
experience at all. The 18 pilot respondents are described in Table 1.




PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                                        www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                       vii


Resp.       Programming                 System Evaluated
             Experience
   1        Expert – CompSci            LaTeX
             PostDoc
 2, 3       Expert – CompSci PhD        OpenInventor
             Students
   4        Expert – PhD Student        C++/Emacs
   5        Expert – PhD Student        Cadence Verilog
   6        Expert – Professional       Oracle procedural SQL
             Programmer
   7        Expert – University         PMS music typesetting
             Technician                    language
   8        Expert – CompSci            Xisabelle theorem prover
             PostDoc
   9        Expert – CompSci PhD        Mathematica
             Student
  10        Expert – CompSci            PVS theorem prover
             PostDoc
  11        Expert – PhD Student        Finale music typesetting
                                           package
12, 13,     None – Musician             Calliope music typesetting
16, 18                                     package
14, 15      Some music research         Calliope music typesetting
             programming                   package
  17        Some music research         Finale music typesetting
             programming                   package
                              Table 1 – Pilot Questionnaire Respondents.

Method
None of the 18 subjects in the study had any degree of prior familiarity with cognitive dimensions.
They were recruited through individual approaches to members of the first author’s department, and
to other academic contacts with an interest in usability. Several respondents were recruited from the
Music Department of Glasgow University, whose interest in notation usability results from their use
of the music typesetting package Calliope, developed by William Clocksin of the Cambridge
Computer Laboratory.
Subjects 1 -- 10 completed the questionnaire without supervision. Subjects 11 -- 18 completed the
questionnaire in an interview, with the first author as interviewer. The interview was prefaced with
the observation that the term “notation” did not necessarily refer to music notation, but to the content
of the computer screen, however that might differ from conventional music notation. In the interview,
no further attempt was made to explain the cognitive dimensions beyond the content of the
questionnaire itself. When respondents in the interview setting did not understand a question, the
interviewer simply proceeded to the next question, in order to make the interview as close as possible
to unsupervised completion of the questionnaire. Where the next question related to the same
cognitive dimension, this often had the effect of clarifying the question and eliciting a response.

Results
The two main groups in the pilot study were those using music notations (who were interviewed) and
those using various programming-related tools (who completed the questionnaire without
supervision). In the case of the interview group, interviews were conducted to a half-hour schedule.


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                  www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                     viii

This was too short – most interviews lasted 35 minutes, and a one-hour interview would have been
more comfortable. In the case of the unsupervised group, most respondent took several days (ranging
to several weeks) to return the completed questionnaire.
The version of the questionnaire used with the two groups had some slight differences also. The
version used by the programmers group did not include the “search” activity, and also did not include
the final two questions in section 4, which asked respondents about further aspects of the system
beyond CDs.
There was a clear difference in the activity profiles of these two groups, as shown in table 2. The
musicians spent the majority of their time transcribing music from other sources, while the
programmers spend more time exploring possible solutions.


        Activity           Programmers           Musicians
        Search                 (--)              8.5 (7.7) %
        Transcribe          34.9 (24.8) %       51.5 (15.7) %
        Add                 24.7 (12.3) %       19.1 (9.1) %
        Restructure         22.3 (15.6) %       19.4 (9.6) %
        Explore             18.0 (19.6) %        2.4 (4.0) %
 Table 2: Mean (and Standard Deviation) percentage of time spent on different activities. Note that
   the version of the questionnaire used by programmers did not incorporate the search activity.

    Neither group appeared to have much trouble in interpreting the CDs, nor in identifying
interesting usability problems in the systems they used. Table 3 summarises the number of explicit
usability issues that were raised when considering each of the CDs. For the purpose of this analysis,
an explicit usability issue is one where the respondent identified some specific aspect of the system
that can be improved, rather than simply saying that the system is good or bad with respect to that CD
(which also happened).


        Dimensions          Programmers            Musicians
      Visibility and             13                  14
       Juxtaposability
      Viscosity                    5                  12
      Diffuseness                 12                   7
      Hard Mental                 11                  16
       Operations
      Error Proneness             13                  11
      Closeness of                 8                   5
       Mapping
      Role                         8                   3
       Expressiveness
      Hidden                       9                  14
       Dependencies
      Progressive                  5                   9
       Evaluation
      Provisionality               4                   8
      Premature                   10                  16
       Commitment
      Consistency                  0                  4
      Secondary                    8                  17


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                  www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                       ix


       Notation
      Abstraction                  3                  7
       Management
  Table 3: Specific usability issues raised by respondents with respect to each cognitive dimension.

Overall, the musicians raised an average of 18.1 usability issues when answering the 16 questions in
section 4 of the questionnaire, while the programmers raised 9.9 usability issues when answering the
14 questions in an earlier version of the questionnaire (simply omitting the last two questions). The
difference can be partially attributed to the interview format, which would have encouraged more
complete responses.
Many respondents simply stated that the system was adequate with regard to a particular dimension,
or that it was inadequate. In most of the rows of table 2 where no specific comment was made about
usability features, the respondent did not leave the box blank, but answered “yes”, “easy” or “no”,
“hard”. The nine programmers made 59 general positive comments and 16 general negative
comments. There were also 2 points at which musicians indicated that they did not understand the
question. By comparison, the programmers made 66 general positive comments, 18 general negative
comments and 9 equivocal comments. There were 4 points at which programmers indicated that they
did not understand the question. There does not appear to be any difference between the two groups
on these measures – we suggest that the usability of a system is best measured not by these general
expressions of satisfaction (or non-satisfaction), but by the number of specific criticisms that are
made by questionnaire respondents.

Evaluation

Good questionnaires should be valid and reliable, meaning that they measure what they are supposed
to and they give the same results every time. At the very least we would expect consistency in
responses made by people evaluating the same system. Happily, that is what we observed. Of the six
respondents describing the Calliope music typesetting package, for instance, five of them mentioned
the same problem under “error-proneness” – they found it very easily accidentally to click on the
wrong line of the music staff, and thereby enter the wrong pitch. Three of them noted under
“viscosity” that it was difficult to change the layout of staves on the page once notes had been
entered. There were many other similar patterns, not only from the Calliope users but from uses of
Finale and Open Inventor. This consistency in response tends to support the validity of the
questionnaire as an evaluation tool.
Nevertheless some problems emerged. This report has not included much detail on the analysis of
sub-devices. In general, this is a problematic aspect of CD analysis. Respondents found it difficult to
understand the concept of the sub-device, especially in the context of Calliope, which has very few (a
couple of respondents mentioned the toolbar as an example of a sub-device). Programmers generally
found this an easier concept to consider, listing 20 sub-devices between them. The sub-devices listed
included text files, pencil and paper, user manuals and compiler output in addition to the expected
browsers and sub-languages. In many cases it was not especially easy to apply cognitive dimensions
to some of these.
It also became clear that for our sample of musicians, drawn from the academic world, the staff
notation of music is a given. Music is staff notation, and vice versa. That opinion would not be shared
by exponents of some traditions of Western music, such as choral singers using tonic sol-fa or the
many composers in popular idioms who work by recording sequencer notations directly onto the
computer, but evidently musicians in our sample had not strayed into those fields. Some respondents
used slight variations on the standard notation (e.g. Gregorian chant notation, which has four lines
rather than five, and diamond-shaped neumes rather than note-heads), but musicologists clearly found
it more difficult than programmers to consider the posibility that the mapping between notation and
product might be completely different. Of course they were also far more expert than any


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                 www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                           x

programmer – an academic musicologist such as these respondents will typically have been reading
music notation since childhood. Even if the programmer respondents had been programming since
childhood, there is no programming environment that has presented the same notation for the last 40
years.
This is an important factor to consider when applying CDs outside the field of programming
environments: where a single representation or notation dominates the thinking of users, they may not
realise that other representations are conceivable and they might regard the notational system as
outside the range of criticism.. Thus, although the responses received might indicate that musicians
did not understand the CDs of role-expressiveness or consistency, as they made few comments on
these topics, it may be the case that they understood the concept but did not have the perspective to
identify those types of problems in their notation.
The larger number of usability issues raised by musicians, although partly due to the presence of an
interviewer, may also reflect the fact that there is a clear distinction between the Calliope system, and
other forms of music notation (such as sheet music). As far as musicians are concerned, Calliope is
not music, any more than a word processor is the English language.
This is a distinction that is far more difficult for programmers to draw. Many comparisons of
different programming language features are made without reference to the editor or development
environment. The CDs framework emphasises that information artefacts include both a notation and
an environment, and that usability is a function of the two. As a result, a number of programmers
encountering this questionnaire (both respondents in this study and more casual readers) make
comments that CDs do not describe the programming language but the editor that one uses. In the
case of very similar textual languages (C and Pascal, for example), this may be true, and
questionnaires of this type must therefore be applied with caution to ensure that the respondent
understands the object of consideration.

Enforced Reflection
Answering the questionnaire does make people think – especially, it seems, system designers. The
two users of logic theorem provers who responded in this pilot study are members of a large
development group in Cambridge that develops theorem proving systems. That group has had a
sceptical attitude toward usability, on the grounds that the only users of theorem provers are the
developers, so they can improve usability as they wish, or on the alternative ground that theorem
proving is meant to be hard, so there is no point trying to camouflage it with nice user interfaces. This
pilot questionnaire inspired a special meeting of the theorem proving group to consider the issues that
it raised, even though few members of the group ever got around to completing the questionnaire.
Reading the answers also made the authors think. The need to improve the account of sub-devices has
been mentioned above. Clarifying our usage of ‘notation’ would also be useful; respondents find it
difficult to regard actions such as mouse-clicks as a form of notation. Perhaps we should call actions
something else, like an interaction language. And we realised that we have overlooked a generic type
pf activity, that of exploring a structure. Future work on the framework will have to take these issues
into account.

Conclusions

The pilot study met our objective – a generalised questionnaire that could be used for very different
systems. Bboth programmers and non-programmers were able to criticise the systems they use in
response to a description of the cognitive dimensions, and the descriptions were mostly acceptably
clear.
This is very encouraging. Questionnaire-based evaluation could be quick and effective, and it may
help to develop simplified descriptions of CDs for design education. But there are still problems.
How, for instance, do we make users realise that the only notation they know is in fact entirely


PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                   www.ppig.org
Blackwell & Green                                                                                        xi

arbitrary, rather than a fixed part of the natural order of things? We look forward to reading further
questionnaire projects developing these issues.

Acknowledgements

We are grateful to the respondents who took part in the pilot study, especially William Clocksin and
the Music Department of Glasgow University. Alan Blackwell’s research is funded by the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under EPSRC grant GR/M16924 “New
paradigms for visual interaction”.

References

Blackwell, A.F. & Green, T.R.G. (1999). Investment of attention as an analytic approach to Cognitive
    Dimensions. In T.R. G. Green, R. Abdullah & P. Brna (Eds.) Collected Papers of the 11th
    Annual Workshop of the Psychology of Programming Interest Group (PPIG-11), pp. 24-35.
Collins, T. & Fung, P. (1999). Evaluating Hank, a cognitive modelling language for psychologists.
    Paper presented at PPIG-11, available on-line from http://www.ppig.org/workshops/11th-
    programme.html.
Green, T.R.G. (1989). Cognitive dimensions of notations. In A. Sutcliffe & L. Macaulay (Eds.),
   People and Computers V. Cambridge University Press.
Green, T.R.G. & Blackwell, A. F. (1998). Cognitive Dimensions of information artefacts: a tutorial.
   Version 1.2, October 1998. (revision of “Cognitive Dimensions of notations and other
   Information Artefacts” at HCI’98) Available at
   http://www.ndirect.co.uk/~thomas.green/workStuff/Papers/
Green, T.R.G. & Petre, M. (1996). Usability analysis of visual programming environments: a
   'cognitive dimensions' approach. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 7,131-174.
Green, T.R.G., Petre, M. & Bellamy, R.K.E. (1991). Comprehensibility of visual and textual
   programs: A test of superlativism against the ‘match-mismatch’ conjecture. In J. Koenemann-
   Belliveau, T.G. Moher & S.P. Robertson (Eds.): Empirical Studies of Programmers: Fourth
   Workshop Norwood, NJ: Ablex, pp. 121-146.
Kadoda, G., Stone, R. & Diaper, D. (1999). Desirable features of educational theorem provers – a
   cognitive dimensions viewpoint. In T.R. G. Green, R. Abdullah & P. Brna (Eds.) Collected
   Papers of the 11th Annual Workshop of the Psychology of Programming Interest Group (PPIG-
   11), pp. 18-23.




PPIG 2000, Cozenza Italy                                                                   www.ppig.org
