                                         User-Centered Programming Language Design: A
                                         Course-Based Case Study




arXiv:2011.07565v1 [cs.PL] 15 Nov 2020
                                         MICHAEL COBLENZ, University of Maryland, USA
                                         ARIEL DAVIS, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         MEGAN HOFMANN, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         VIVIAN HUANG, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         SIYUE JIN, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         MAX KRIEGER, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         KYLE LIANG, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         BRIAN WEI, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         MENGCHEN SAM YONG, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         JONATHAN ALDRICH, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
                                         Recently, user-centered methods have been proposed to improve the design of programming languages. In
                                         order to explore what beneﬁts these methods might have for novice programming language designers, we
                                         taught a collection of user-centered programming language design methods to a group of eight students. We
                                         observed that natural programming and usability studies helped the students reﬁne their language designs
                                         and identify opportunities for improvement, even in the short duration of a course project.

                                         1   INTRODUCTION
                                         PLIERS (Programming Language Iterative Evaluation and Reﬁnement System) is a process for pro-
                                         gramming language design that integrates user-centered methods with traditional formal meth-
                                         ods [2]. By including formal methods in the process, PLIERS is intended to facilitate creation of
                                         sound languages that are also as usable as possible. In designing PLIERS, Coblenz et al. evaluated
                                         the method by applying it themselves to two diﬀerent programming languages. We were interested
                                         in assessing the PLIERS process by having people who did not develop it apply some of its tech-
                                         niques. What usability problems could language designers identify in their language prototypes?
                                         What challenges would they face in applying the methods?
                                            Evaluating design processes is challenging. One might like to conduct a randomized controlled
                                         trial in which a collection of designers are recruited to design languages. Some of the designers
                                         would be taught the method being evaluated, and the rest of the designers might receive some
                                         kind of training in traditional methods, such as case study or benchmarking methodology. Then,
                                         the designers would be given design tasks, and then resulting languages would be evaluated in
                                         quantitative user studies.
                                            Unfortunately, such a study is impractical; language design is very expensive, taking months or
                                         years. Furthermore, there are many relevant variables in such a study (such as individual designer
                                         experience, preferences, and skills), and controlling for them seems unlikely. Instead, we sought to
                                         use a lighter-weight approach to obtain some insights regarding what happens when those other
                                         than the designers of PLIERS use it. We leveraged our context: because the last author was teaching
                                         a programming language prototyping course, we conducted our study in the context of the course.
                                         Thus, our evaluation takes the form of a case study, in which we applied PLIERS in our course
                                         context.
                                            By studying PLIERS in the context of a course we showed how user-centered methods can be
                                         useful to novice programming language designers. The students were able to identify shortcom-
                                         ings in their designs and identify new directions for language design. For example, one language
                                         was presented in functional style, yet even a programmer who preferred functional programming

                                                                                            1
Michael Coblenz, Ariel Davis, Megan Hofmann, Vivian Huang, Siyue Jin, Max Krieger, Kyle Liang, Brian Wei, Mengchen
                                                                                    Sam Yong, and Jonathan Aldrich

ended up using imperative constructs, suggesting that an imperative approach might be worth in-
vestigating. Another observation was that in natural programming studies (in which participants
are typically asked to write programs without giving them any training at all), corpora can be used
as a substitute for live participants: rather than asking participants to write bespoke code, one can
analyze text that people have written already.

2 RELATED WORK
The problem of taking programmers into account when designing programming languages was dis-
cussed by Newell and Card in 1985: “Millions for compilers but hardly a penny for understanding
human programming language use” [9]. Language designers have to make hundreds of diﬀerent
decisions when designing programming languages, and although many of these decisions likely
impact programmers’ abilities to achieve their goals when using the languages, designers lack a
satisfactory way to leverage user data to inform their designs.
   To address this problem, Steﬁk and Hanenberg have argued for thorough and careful random-
ized controlled trials of programming languages [12]. Another approach has been to consider cog-
nitive science, for example leveraging theories of natural language text understanding [10]. Yet
another tool is the cognitive dimensions of notation, which provide a vocabulary for discussing
tradeoﬀs in notations [5]. PLIERS [2] represents another approach to providing design guidance,
focusing on adapting methods from HCI research to the process of programming language design.
Since the only users of PLIERS have been the designers, our focus in this work is on seeing whether
others might be able to use the same techniques in their own programming language designs.

3 PROCEDURE
The course in which we conducted our study was open to students who had already completed
courses in either object-oriented programming or systems programming. The course centered
around a project, in which individuals or small groups (up to two students per group) were asked
to design a new programming language according to their own design goals. In addition, students
were expected to complete assignments regarding programming language design and implemen-
tation.
   Work on the project was divided into phases. After each phase, students received feedback from
the course staﬀ that they could leverage in future phases. Phases were as follows:
  (1) Language proposal, in which students proposed a new programming language for some do-
      main. Students were told that they could choose a very narrow domain, such as ballet chore-
      ography, or a broad one, such as systems programming.
  (2) Concepts for language design, in which students applied Jackson’s Design by Concept tech-
      niques [6] to produce an initial set of concepts for their language.
  (3) Language semantics, in which students deﬁned abstract syntax and either static or dynamic
      semantics for fragments of their languages.
  (4) User study design, in which students proposed and prototyped a user study of key aspects of
      their programming languages.
  (5) User study execution, in which students ran a revised version of their user study.
  (6) Final design and prototyping, in which students revised their design based on the results of
      their study, implemented their language, and reported on the changes they had made based
      on the user studies.
   In addition to attending lectures on methods for completing the above work, students attended
lectures and completed assignments regarding implementing interpreters for functional languages
and transpilers for object-oriented languages.

                                                        2
User-Centered Programming Language Design: A Course-Based Case Study


   We taught students how to integrate user-centered methods into their language design process
in four 80-minute class meetings. Although the authors presented slides, some of the time was
spent discussing the material and letting the students try the techniques on small examples. We
taught key concepts and methods that PLIERS suggests when designing programming languages:
  (1) Deﬁning usability properties of languages
  (2) Recruitment techniques
  (3) Participant selection and pre-screening
  (4) Natural programming studies [8]
  (5) Usability studies
    (a) Choosing appropriate usability questions
    (b) Techniques for designing tasks in programming language studies, such as Wizard of Oz [3]
    (c) Collecting data (e.g. think-aloud protocol)
    (d) Post-study surveys
  (6) Randomized controlled trials
  We received IRB approval to use the work products of the students for research purposes. Stu-
dents obtained informed consent from their user study participants, whom they recruited as a
convenience sample.

4 PROJECTS
In order to put the results in context, we summarize in Table 1 the projects that the students
selected. To improve students’ anonymity, we have replaced the language names with numeric
identiﬁers (L1, L2, etc.). Although we taught a wide variety of techniques, we encouraged the
students to consider either a usability study or a natural programming study in order to obtain
results with an amount of eﬀort that would be appropriate in the context of a course project.
   One additional student started a project on random number generation, but did not complete
the project.



 Name      Purpose                                                         Students Methods
 L1        A functional language for writing concurrent code               2         Natural
                                                                                     programming
 L2        Programming automatic knitting machines (for textile fab- 1               Natural
           rication)                                                                 programming
 L3        Making it easier to write CSS code in BEM format [13]     1               Usability
                                                                                     study
 L4        Analogical reasoning, e.g. “what is equivalent to apple if      1         Natural
           lemon is sour?”                                                           programming
 L5        Programming Internet of Things devices                          1         Usability
                                                                                     study
 L6        Describing two-dimensional puzzles, such as Sudoku              2         Natural pro-
                                                                                     gramming;
                                                                                     usability
                                                                                     study
                       Table 1. Language design projects selected by the students.



                                                     3
Michael Coblenz, Ariel Davis, Megan Hofmann, Vivian Huang, Siyue Jin, Max Krieger, Kyle Liang, Brian Wei, Mengchen
                                                                                    Sam Yong, and Jonathan Aldrich


5   RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
We organize this section by method, and summarize the experiences the students reported from
the methods. For each method, we derive recommendations for future users of that method on
programming language design.

5.1 Natural Programming
Projects L1, L2, L4, and L6 included natural programming studies. In L1, the students were inter-
ested in how programmers could specify operations on channels, which can be used in concurrent
contexts to send messages between threads or processes. The students were inspired by Go [4],
which supports <- syntax for sending messages along channels. For example, in Go, the code be-
low [7] creates a channel called messages. Then, it sends the “ping” message along the channel
messages. Finally, it receives a message along the messages channel, putting the result in msg.

    messages := make ( chan string )
    go func () { messages <- " ping" }()
    msg := <- messages

   The students did not ﬁnd support for such syntax in their natural programming study. Instead,
participants invoked send and receive functions. Although this does not imply that the arrow
syntax is not helpful, it at least suggests that using named functions may be more natural. This
raises a question of the natural programming technique: for an approach to be natural, is it nec-
essary for participants to invent it themselves, or does it suﬃce for the technique to be easily
learnable with good results after learning? Perhaps <- is equally “natural” even though the par-
ticipants were biased in their selection due to their past experience with other languages. Might
there be substantive beneﬁts of adopting syntactic choices that participants did not invent? The <-
operator is indeed shorter, but the beneﬁt may be so small that it cannot be practically measured,
whereas send and receive might be more learnable. The tradeoﬀ between concise and natural
syntactic choices motivates further research to evaluate in what cases choices that are natural are
also better in practical ways, such as learnability. Studies of non-native English speakers suggest
that keyword choice may not be a very large factor in language usability [11].
   Project L2 conducted a variation on the natural programming technique. Due to limitations
imposed by conducting the study during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the need to work with
knitting domain experts, the student decided to conduct a corpus study rather than recruiting
participants. Although corpus studies are normally not also natural programming studies, in this
case, the corpus contained instructions that had been written for humans, not for machines. By
mining Stitch-Maps [1], a web site hosting knitting patterns, it was possible to obtain a collection
of ﬁve sets of instructions for knitting cables, which are a hard-to-describe aspect of knitting in-
structions. Each set of instructions followed the same pattern, which was evidence for using the
corresponding structure in the knitting programming language: Slip <loop count> to hold on <fron-
t/back>, stitch instructions on main row, stitch instructions on held stitches. The corpus study was
limited to patterns by one particular designer. Future work could expand the study to multiple
designers to assess whether the same patterns are used by the broader knitting community.
   The corpus also contained patterns that led to the following language constructs, which refer-
ence the domain-speciﬁc concepts of needles and loops:
    • Named needles or LIFO queues of loops are created by the phrase: needle <identifier>
    • A to phrase, which places loops on an identiﬁed needle: operations                 to
      <needle-identifier> in <front/back>

                                                        4
User-Centered Programming Language Design: A Course-Based Case Study


    • A from phrase, which consumes loops from an identiﬁed needle: operations from
      <needle-identifier>
   Project L4 conducted a natural programming study to develop a language for analogical reason-
ing. The student ﬁrst asked participants to do some analogical reasoning themselves. For example,
one prompt was:
      Bakers: the watchmakers of [NOUN]. You’ll ﬁnd them working on watches of their
      own: [VERB] the [NOUN], [VERB] the [NOUN], and [VERB] the [NOUN].
   Some participants gave bread for the nouns, which is not surprising, but some gave interesting
answers for the verbs, such as answers relating to winding, which pertains to watchmaking.
   Then, participants were asked to propose a syntax for analogical queries. Although some pro-
posed a form that was analogous to what they had been given, an interesting proposal to write a
query for The integral, like a [NOUN], [VERB] space into tiny [NOUN:PLURAL] was integral, ? :
? -> ?. That is, if an integral acts on something, what else acts on something else in an analogous
fashion?
   The student reﬂected on the experience:
      I’m glad I did a natural programming study rather than a usability study of an existing
      system (which doesn’t exist yet anyway), since it aﬀorded a closer look into what kinds
      of analogies would be useful to query for. . . and what expectations people have for
      such a system. Staying “close to the metal” of English and writing questions, rather
      than presenting a monolithic system outright, gave me more insight into the needs
      and quirks of potential users. It helped avoid the bias of a more constrained set of
      “problems” that I’d choose for a concrete usability study.
   L6 pertained to descriptions of two-dimensional puzzles. In one task, participants were asked
to write code to describe a series of pictured grids. They used a variety of approaches: a C-like
2D array; a matrix constructor; and Python range syntax, including negative numbers for reverse
indexing. The students observed that the participants seemed to be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by
their prior programming experience. In cases like these, other methods must be used to evaluate
whether one approach is signiﬁcantly better than the others, but these methods are likely not
feasible in the short duration of the class project.

5.2 Usability Studies
Projects L3, L5, and L6 included usability studies.
   In L3, the student conducted an Internet-based usability study of a language to make it easier for
CSS developers to use block-element-modiﬁer conventions in their languages [13]. In the study,
one task gave participants a pair of images, which represented two style variants of the same web
page. Participants were asked to write code in the language to specify the styles. The primary
usability problem the student identiﬁed was that participants with little general programming ex-
perience neglected to use the @mod feature (as was required) to express the variations in styles
between the alternatives. However, it is not clear why the participants made this mistake. This
diﬃculty highlights a tradeoﬀ in the design of usability studies. By conducting the study on the
Internet, the student was able to attract a more diverse population of participants, but the format
did not allow for think-aloud or an opportunity for the experimenter to ask questions of the par-
ticipants. The latter may be a key ingredient in early-stage user studies in order to elucidate the
causes of errors.
   The student developing L5 asked participants to do three programming tasks. Participants were
given example code and architectural documentation for the language, which facilitated program-
ming distributed Internet-of-Things systems. The intent was to study how programmers could

                                                     5
Michael Coblenz, Ariel Davis, Megan Hofmann, Vivian Huang, Siyue Jin, Max Krieger, Kyle Liang, Brian Wei, Mengchen
                                                                                    Sam Yong, and Jonathan Aldrich


specify when code would run, since code needed to run in response to various events. However,
participants found the tasks more challenging than expected, in part because they found they
needed to also address the question of where the code would run in the distributed system. The
study helped in identifying this problem, according to the student who designed the language:
      Many questions were raised of the delineation of where code runs when writing a
      timing block. This was surprising as I believed the main issue . . . was how to structure
      timing constructs. . . .
   These observations helped motivate structural changes in the language. In the revised version,
the questions of when code runs is intertwined with the question of where the code runs. Before, the
language treated the two concepts as being orthogonal. The designers hope that the new approach
will be easier to reason about.
   The L6 study included a task in which participants were shown basic constructs of the language
through an example, and then asked to use that language to describe Sudoku. The example showed
functional-style code. Interestingly, one participant, who said their favorite language was SML
(which is a functional language), wrote imperative-style code (including loop and return). It is
notable that the participant invented syntax seemingly at odds with their own preferences and with
the example. Also, the programming task study changed smoothly into a natural programming
study, in which the participant invented their own syntax. This suggests that in the future, it might
be useful for study designers to think of programming tasks along a continuum from completely
natural programming (in which participants receive no guidance at all) to a completely constrained
environment, in which participants must satisfy a formal language speciﬁcation.

6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We derive several recommendations for language designers who seek to integrate user-centered
design approaches into their work. For natural programming studies:
    • Using natural programming for selecting keywords is only a ﬁrst step; naturalness is only
      one of several relevant criteria, and it is not yet known how to weigh the impact of natural-
      ness.
    • Consider using existing corpora as sources of data in natural programming studies. These
      have potentially lower cost and allow obtaining data from more diverse populations than
      one might otherwise have access to.
    • Natural programming oﬀers opportunities for deeper insights into the expectations and ex-
      isting skills of user than might be obtained in a usability study. Usability studies focus partic-
      ipants on artifacts that may be unnatural for them; in contrast, natural programming studies
      consider participants as they are already.
    • In cases where prior experience strongly impacts behavior, natural programming may be
      useful for identifying which experience is relevant, allowing development of tools that are
      more natural for particular groups.
  For usability studies:
    • If the experimenter only has the results of participants’ work, it can be impossible to in-
      fer why participants behaved they way they did. Think-aloud studies or asking follow-up
      questions of participants are likely better ways of understanding participant behavior.
    • Usability studies can be useful for checking designers’ assumptions about which parts of
      the programming tasks will be challenging. Parts that seem hard to the designer may not be
      signiﬁcant obstacles to success, but other parts may represent serious usability problems.
    • Even in an interactive user study, we need better techniques for understanding how people
      make decisions. In L6, it would be useful to know why a functional programmer chose an

                                                        6
User-Centered Programming Language Design: A Course-Based Case Study


       imperative approach, but we lack tools to answer that question deﬁnitively. Of course, if the
       experimenter had asked the participant, that would have been helpful, but experimenters
       frequently do not identify some interesting questions until it is too late to ask them. We
       can gain some insight from grounded theory methods, which leverage iteration in the anal-
       ysis step; initial data from a study may help identify questions to ask participants in later
       iterations of the study.
   This research focused on how beginning language designers might beneﬁt from user-centered
methods, particularly usability studies and natural programming studies. It identiﬁed several ben-
eﬁts of using these methods, but future work should investigate to what extent these methods
are useful for experienced programming language designers. Future work should also investigate
to what extent these methods lead to generalizable language design guidelines, as opposed to re-
sults that are speciﬁc to the particular languages being studied. Finally, although experimenter
skill and experience certainly plays a role, methodological development may improve the ability
of experimenters to capture deeper insights about programmer behavior.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the assistance of the participants in our user studies.

REFERENCES
 [1] JC Briar. 2020. Stitch Maps. https://stitch-maps.com/
 [2] Michael Coblenz, Gauri Kambhatla, Paulette Koronkevich, Jenna L. Wise, Celeste Barnaby, Joshua Sunshine, Jonathan
     Aldrich, and Brad A. Myers. 2019. PLIERS: A Process that Integrates User-Centered Methods into Programming
     Language Design. arXiv:1912.04719
 [3] Nils Dahlbäck, Arne Jönsson, and Lars Ahrenberg. 1993. Wizard of Oz studies - why and how. Knowledge-based
     systems 6, 4 (1993), 258–266. https://doi.org/10.1016/0950-7051(93)90017-N
 [4] Alan A.A. Donovan and Brian W. Kernighan. 2015. The Go Programming Language (1st ed.). Addison-Wesley Profes-
     sional.
 [5] Thomas R. G. Green and Marian Petre. 1996. Usability analysis of visual programming environments: a ‘cognitive
     dimensions’ framework. Journal of Visual Languages & Computing 7, 2 (1996), 131–174.
 [6] Daniel Jackson. 2019. Design by Concept: A New Way to Think About Software. Pleasant Press, Newton, Massachusetts.
 [7] Mark McGranaghan. 2020. Go by Example: Channels. https://gobyexample.com/channels
 [8] Brad A. Myers, John F. Pane, and Amy J. Ko. 2004. Natural Programming Languages and Environments. Commun.
     ACM 47 (2004), 47–52. Issue 9. https://doi.org/10.1145/1015864.1015888
 [9] Allen Newell and Stuart K. Card. 1985. The Prospects for Psychological Science in Human-computer Interaction.
     Hum.-Comput. Interact. 1, 3 (Sept. 1985), 209–242. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327051hci0103_1
[10] Nancy Pennington. 1987. Stimulus structures and mental representations in expert comprehension of computer pro-
     grams. Cognitive Psychology 19, 3 (1987), 295 – 341. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(87)90007-7
[11] Kyle Reestman and Brian Dorn. 2019. Native Language’s Eﬀect on Java Compiler Errors. In Proceedings of the 2019
     ACM Conference on International Computing Education Research (Toronto ON, Canada) (ICER ’19). Association for
     Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 249–257. https://doi.org/10.1145/3291279.3339423
[12] Andreas Steﬁk and Stefan Hanenberg. 2017. Methodological irregularities in programming-language research. Com-
     puter 50, 8 (2017), 60–63. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2017.3001257
[13] Vsevolod Strukchinsky and Vladimir Starkov. 2020. BEM – Block Element Modiﬁer. http://getbem.com




                                                          7
