Simplicity Roadmap
For announcements on progress on this and other Simplicity and SimplicityHL work, you can join the
Simplicity Community Telegram group
.
Upcoming SimplicityHL features
SimplicityHL continues to gain additional notation and convenience features. The
simc
compiler will be updated to support additional syntax for these features. SimplicityHL language enhancement priorities include
Infix operators: familiar notations like
==
,
<
,
>
,
+
,
-
,
*
,
/
,
&
,
|
for comparisons, arithmetic, and logic operations
More integer types: specific-width integers; signed integers (supporting negative numbers)
if
and
return
statements
A more conventional loop syntax (for bounded loops)
Modules/namespaces
Library functions
State management
Simplicity programs can track persistent state via cryptographic commitments. This provides proper support for general
covenants
that need to keep track of arbitrary history as users interact with them over time. (You can see a brief demonstration of this approach in the
December 23, 2025 Office Hours session
.)
Documention and sample contracts demonstrating this are forthcoming. Library code is also under development to support maintaining arbitrary quantities of state information (with selective revelation and efficient updates) via a
Merkle tree
.
Standard library
A standard library for SimplicityHL is
under development
.
Developer tool improvements
Improvements are planned to various developer tools, including the existing
language server
for VSCode integration, and the
hal-simplicity
command-line tool.
Type-based SimplicityHL
A future version of SimplicityHL using type theory foundations is in preparation. In the short term,
simc
will receive a new type inference engine in based on this work, which will relax existing requirements for mandatory type annotations. Over time, extensions for dependent type mechanisms will be exposed in SimplicityHL.
Mutinynet integration
An integration of Simplicity in
Mutinynet
, a signet (test network) that remains architecturally closer to Bitcoin Core, is in progress. This will demonstrate the potential for development with Simplicity on a Bitcoin-like chain without Elements extensions.
AMP and LWK integrations
Integrations of Simplicity with
AMP
and
LWK
are underway, in order to offer financial application developers more power when building on Liquid Network.
Documentation updates
In addition to documentation on features mentioned above, significant new and updated documentation is in preparation, including material on design patterns and avoiding pitfalls in smart contract design.
Simplicity Unchained
For blockchains where a native Simplicity integration isn't present, like the Bitcoin Mainnet, an
oracle
-based Simplicity interpreter called Simplicity Unchained will offer Simplicity scripting support. The oracle can make statements confirming when contract conditions (expressed in Simplicity programs) have been met and thereby approve transactions permitted by those conditions. This indirectly brings the power and determinism of Simplicity scripting to other chains.
Oracle tools
Tools and examples are being created for integrating other data sources into Simplicity contract logic via signed oracle statements. This can support a range of use cases, from price oracles to confirm off-chain asset price data, to importing data from financial companies' existing back-office databases, making them a source of truth for portions of contracts' logic.
Sample applications
Prototypes of several real financial applications on Simplicity are being specified and implemented. Work in progress on some of these is available in
the
simplicity-contracts
repository on GitHub
.
Ecosystem
Tools and standards for building financial applications to interact with Simplicity contracts, as well as for connecting existing wallet apps to contract flows, are in development. See "
Road to Ecosystem
" for an overview of the requirements for safely connecting wallets.
September 9, 2026
GitHub
Was this page helpful?
Thanks for your feedback!
Thanks for your feedback! Help us improve this page by logging a documentation
issue
.