PDF page 2:
this approach is impractical [7, 21]. Alternatively, one can use SNARKs without
trusted setup [19, 23, 41, 44] but their verifiers are more expensive than those
of SNARKs with trusted setup, both asymptotically and concretely. Recent
works [11, 13, 17, 18] aim to address the inefficiency of SNARK-based IVC, with
an innovative approach: at each step, the verifier circuit “defers” expensive steps
in verifying a SNARK for NP instances (e.g., verifying polynomial evaluation
proofs) by accumulating those steps into a single instance that is later checked
efficiently. However, these works still require the prover to produce a SNARK at
each step and the verifier circuit to partially verify that SNARK.
     We introduce a new approach that avoids SNARKs (and more generally
arguments of knowledge) entirely and relies purely on deferral to realize IVC. In
a nutshell, instead of accumulating expensive steps of verifying a SNARK for
NP instances, the verifier circuit in our approach accumulates the NP instances
themselves. We formalize this technique as a new and minimal primitive, which we
refer to as a folding scheme. A folding scheme is weaker, simpler, and far more ef-
ficient compared to arguments of knowledge including SNARKs. Indeed, realizing
IVC via folding schemes results in improved efficiency over prior work (Figure 2):
(1) the verifier circuit is constant-sized and its size is dominated by two group
scalar multiplications; this is the smallest verifier circuit in the literature (in the
context of recursive proof composition); and (2) the prover’s work at each step
is dominated by two multiexponentiations of size O(|F |), providing the fastest
prover in the literature, both asymptotically and concretely. Section 1.4 provides
a detailed comparison between our approach and prior work.


1.1   Folding Schemes

A folding scheme is defined with respect to an NP relation, and it is a protocol
between an untrusted prover and a verifier. Both entities hold two N -sized NP
instances, and the prover in addition holds purported witnesses for both instances.
The protocol enables the prover and the verifier to output a single N -sized NP
instance, which we refer to as a folded instance. Furthermore, the prover privately
outputs a purported witness to the folded instance using purported witnesses for
the original instances. Informally, a folding scheme guarantees that the folded
instance is satisfiable only if the original instances are satisfiable. A folding
scheme is said to be non-trivial if the verifier’s costs and the communication are
lower in the case where the verifier participates in the folding scheme and then
verifies a purported NP witness for the folded instance than the case where the
verifier verifies purported NP witnesses for each of the original instances.
    Several existing techniques exhibit the two-to-one reduction pattern of folding
schemes. Examples include the sumcheck protocol [38] and the split-and-fold
techniques in inner product arguments [12]. Appendix A provides further details.

Remark 1 (Folding Schemes vs. SNARKs). SNARKs for NP [8, 26, 27, 33, 39]
trivially imply a folding scheme for NP: given two NP instances u1 and u2 and
the corresponding witnesses, the prover proves u1 by producing a SNARK. The
verifier checks that SNARK and then sets u2 to be the folded instance. However,


                                          2

PDF page 3:
we construct a folding scheme for NP without relying on SNARKs (or more
generally arguments of knowledge). Specifically, our folding scheme is weaker
than any argument of knowledge (succinct or otherwise) because it merely reduces
the satisfiability of two NP instances to the satisfiability of a single NP instance.1

    To design a folding scheme for NP, we start with a popular NP-complete
language that generalizes arithmetic circuit satisfiability: R1CS (Definition 10).
As we illustrate later, it is difficult to devise a folding scheme for R1CS. To
address this, we introduce a variant of R1CS, called relaxed R1CS, which, like
R1CS, not only characterizes NP, but, unlike R1CS, can support a folding scheme.
The following theorem captures the cryptographic and efficiency characteristics
of our folding scheme for relaxed R1CS.
Theorem 1. There exists a constant-round, public-coin, zero-knowledge folding
scheme for relaxed R1CS where for N -sized relaxed R1CS instances over a finite
field F with the same “structure” (i.e., R1CS coefficient matrices), the prover’s
work is Oλ (N ), and the verifier’s work and the communication are both Oλ (1),
assuming the existence of any additively-homomorphic commitment scheme that
provides Oλ (1)-sized commitments to N -sized vectors over F (e.g., Pedersen’s
commitments), where λ is the security parameter.
   Because our folding scheme is public coin, it can be made non-interactive in the
random oracle model using the Fiat-Shamir transform [25], and be instantiated
(heuristically) in the standard model using a concrete hash function. We rely on
such a non-interactive folding scheme to construct IVC.

1.2   IVC from Non-Interactive Folding Schemes
We show how to realize IVC using a non-interactive version of our folding scheme
for relaxed R1CS. We refer to our construction as Nova.
    Recall that an IVC is an argument of knowledge [33, 39]2 for incremental
computations of the form y = F (ℓ) (x), where F is a (possibly non-deterministic)
computation, ℓ > 0, x is a public input, and y is the public output. At each
incremental step, the IVC prover produces a proof that the step was computed
correctly and it has verified a proof for the prior step. In other words, at
each incremental step, the IVC prover produces a proof of satisfiability for
an augmented circuit that augments the circuit for F with a “verifier circuit”
that verifies the proof of the prior step. Recursively, the final proof proves the
correctness of the entire incremental computation. A key aspect of IVC is that
neither the IVC verifier’s work nor the IVC proof size depends on the number of
1
  This work realizes IVC using our folding scheme. As IVC implies SNARKs (e.g.,
  see [7]), one might wonder whether folding schemes are in general weaker than
  SNARKs. However, existing constructions of IVC (including our own) rely on addi-
  tional assumptions (§4.2), which the resulting IVC-based SNARK inherits.
2
  An argument of knowledge for circuit satisfiability enables an untrusted polynomial-
  time prover to prove to a verifier the knowledge of a witness w such that C(w, x) = y,
  where C is a circuit, x is some public input, and y is some public output.


                                          3
