Getting started
Contract gallery
Contract gallery
NFT contracts
​
Sale of token for ada
The seller deposits a token in a Marlowe contract and the buyer purchases it with ada.
Sale of a token for stablecoins
The sellet deposits a token in a Marlowe contract and the buyer purchases it with Djed or iUSD.
Sale of a token with royalties
The artist receives royalties when the buyer purchases a token from a seller.
Swap of tokens for tokens
Two parties each deposit tokens and receive each others' tokens upon settlement.
Small airdrop of tokens
Several parties receive an airdrop of tokens at a predetermined time.
Several NFTs bundled as a collective NFT
A Marlowe contract that is itself an NFT bundles several other NFTs into a smart NFT.
Shared ownership of an NFT
Several parties jointly purchase an NFT, with an option for one party to buy it from the others.
NFT used as collateral for a loan
An NFT is deposited as a collateral for a loan, and lost if the loan is not repaid on time.
Pawning a token for a stablecoin
An NFT is pawned for iUSD, and the shop has the option to keep the token unless it is redeemed.
Token sale with oracle
Tokens are sold for ada, where a price oracle sets the exchange rate.
Auction of an NFT
An English auction is held to sell an NFT to the highest bidder.
Finance contracts
​
ACTUS contract for principal at maturity
Interest is paid periodically for a loan, with the final payment being the principal.
Coupon bond with guarantor
An example coupon bond is guaranteed by a third party.
Miscellaneous
​
A geolocated Marlowe contract
Cardano Beam adds geolocation to a Marlowe contract.
First-of-kind on mainnet
​
First peer-to-peer Marlowe loan on mainnet
A peer-to-peer installment loan uses a private stablecoin.
First reference script execution on mainnet
The first Plutus V2 reference script runs on the Cardano mainnet, in the form of a token swap.
First Plutus V2 on mainnet
The first Plutus V2 script runs on the Cardano mainnet, in the form of a Marlowe airdrop.
First Marlowe token swap on mainnet
The first input is applied to a Marlowe contract on the Cardano mainnet.
First Marlowe contract on mainnet
The first Marlowe contract is executed on the Cardano mainnet.
Example contracts on Cardano mainnet
​
If you want some inspiration and would like to get an idea of the variety of Marlowe contracts we have already run on mainnet, please browse through the examples accessed through the linked images above. The contract gallery contains various Marlowe contract use cases that have already been successfully executed on mainnet.
Each tile in the gallery above corresponds to a
Jupyter (.ipynb) notebook file
. Jupyter notebook files can be viewed in a web browser and use a format that supports an interactive computational environment combining code, text, and images.
See also
​
real-world-marlowe GitHub repo
Edit this page
Previous
Marlowe starter kit
Next
MarloweScan
