       Zexe: Enabling Decentralized Private Computation

           Sean Bowe                    Alessandro Chiesa                       Matthew Green
          sean@z.cash                  alexch@berkeley.edu                    mgreen@cs.jhu.edu
             Zcash                          UC Berkeley                     Johns Hopkins University

            Ian Miers                     Pratyush Mishra                         Howard Wu
      imiers@cs.jhu.edu               pratyush@berkeley.edu                howardwu@berkeley.edu
          Cornell Tech                      UC Berkeley                          UC Berkeley

                                            February 21, 2019


                                                   Abstract
     Ledger-based systems that support rich applications often suffer from two limitations. First, validating
a transaction requires re-executing the state transition that it attests to. Second, transactions not only reveal
which application had a state transition but also reveal the application’s internal state.
     We design, implement, and evaluate Zexe, a ledger-based system where users can execute offline
computations and subsequently produce transactions, attesting to the correctness of these computations,
that satisfy two main properties. First, transactions hide all information about the offline computations.
Second, transactions can be validated in constant time by anyone, regardless of the offline computation.
     The core of Zexe is a construction for a new cryptographic primitive that we introduce, decentralized
private computation (DPC) schemes. In order to achieve an efficient implementation of our construction, we
leverage tools in the area of cryptographic proofs, including succinct zero knowledge proofs and recursive
proof composition. Overall, transactions in Zexe are 968 bytes regardless of the offline computation, and
generating them takes less than a minute plus a time that grows with the offline computation.
     We demonstrate how to use Zexe to realize privacy-preserving analogues of popular applications:
private decentralized exchanges for user-defined fungible assets and regulation-friendly private stablecoins.

Keywords: decentralized computation; zero knowledge proofs; succinct arguments




                                                       1
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                                        3
    1.1 Our contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     4
    1.2 Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      5

2   Techniques                                                                                                          7
    2.1 Achieving privacy for a single arbitrary function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     7
    2.2 Difficulties with achieving privacy for user-defined functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      8
    2.3 The records nano-kernel: a minimalist shared execution environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8
    2.4 Decentralized private computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      10
    2.5 Achieving an efficient implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      12
    2.6 Deployment considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      14

3   Definition of decentralized private computation schemes                                                            15
    3.1 Data structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
    3.2 Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     16
    3.3 Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17

4   Construction of decentralized private computation schemes                                                          21
    4.1 Building blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    21
    4.2 Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     21

5   Delegating zero knowledge execution                                                                                25
    5.1 Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     25
    5.2 Additional building block: randomizable signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
    5.3 A delegable DPC scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
    5.4 Threshold transactions and blind transactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      28

6   Applications                                                                                                       29
    6.1 User-defined assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    29
    6.2 Decentralized exchanges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      30
    6.3 Stablecoins and centrally-managed assets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       33

7   Implementation strategy                                                                                            35

8   System implementation                                                                                              40

9   System evaluation                                                                                                  42
    9.1 Cryptographic building blocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      42
    9.2 The execute NP relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    42
    9.3 DPC algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     42
    9.4 DPC data structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    43

A Proof of security for our DPC scheme                                                                                 45
  A.1 Building blocks for the simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      45
  A.2 The ideal-world simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      46
  A.3 Proof of security by hybrid argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       49

B Construction of a delegable DPC scheme                                                                               51
  B.1 Definition and construction of a randomizable signature scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           51
  B.2 Construction of a delegable DPC scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         52

C Extensions in functionality and in security                                                                          55

Acknowledgments                                                                                                        57

References                                                                                                             57




                                                            2
1    Introduction
Distributed ledgers are a mechanism that maintains data across a distributed system while ensuring that
every party has the same view of the data, even in the presence of corrupted parties. Ledgers can provide an
indisputable history of all “events” logged in a system, thereby offering a mechanism for multiple parties
to collaborate with minimal trust (any party can ensure the system’s integrity by auditing history). Interest
in distributed ledgers has soared recently, catalyzed by their use in cryptocurrencies (peer-to-peer payment
systems) and by their potential as a foundation for new forms of financial systems, governance, and data
sharing. In this work we study two limitations of ledgers, one about privacy and the other about scalability.
The privacy problem. The main strength of distributed ledgers is also their main weakness: the history of
all events is available for anyone to read. This severely limits a direct application of distributed ledgers.
     For example, in ledger-based payment systems such as Bitcoin [Nak09], every payment transaction reveals
the payment’s sender, receiver, and amount. This not only reveals private financial details of individuals and
businesses using the system,1 but also violates fungibility, a fundamental economic property of money. This
lack of privacy becomes more severe in smart contract systems like Ethereum [Woo17], wherein transactions
not only contain payment details, but also embed function calls to specific applications. In these systems,
every application’s internal state is public, and so is the history of function calls associated to it.
     This problem has motivated prior work to find ways to achieve meaningful privacy guarantees on ledgers.
For example, the Zerocash protocol [BCG+ 14] provides privacy-preserving payments, and Hawk [KMS+ 16]
enables general state transitions with data privacy, that is, an application’s data is hidden from third parties.
     However, all prior work is limited to hiding the inputs and outputs of a state transition but not which
transition function is being executed. That is, prior work achieves data privacy but not also function privacy.
In systems with a single transition function this is not a concern.2 In systems with multiple transition
functions, however, this leakage is problematic. For example, Ethereum currently supports thousands of
separate ERC-20 “token” contracts [Eth18], each representing a distinct currency on the Ethereum ledger;
even if these contracts each individually adopted a protocol such as Zerocash to hide details about token
payments, the corresponding transactions would still reveal which token was being exchanged. Moreover, the
leakage of this information would substantially reduce the anonymity set of those payments.
The re-execution problem. Public auditability in the aforementioned systems (and many others) is achieved
via direct verification of state transitions. This creates two problems. First, validating a transaction involves
re-executing the associated computation and so, to discourage denial-of-service attacks whereby users send
transactions that take a long time to validate, current systems introduce mechanisms such as gas to make users
pay more for longer computations. Second, even with such mechanisms, validating an expensive transaction
may simply not be economically profitable, a problem known as the “Verifier’s Dilemma” [LTKS15]. These
problems have resulted in Bitcoin forks [Bit15] and Ethereum attacks [Eth16].
In sum, there is a dire need for techniques that facilitate the use of distributed ledgers for rich applications,
without compromising privacy (of data or functions) or relying on unnecessary re-executions. Prior works
only partially address this need, as discussed in Section 1.2 below.
   1Even if payments merely contain addresses rather than, say, social security numbers, much information about individuals and
                                                                                                            +     +
businesses can be gleaned by analyzing the flow of money over time between addresses [RH11, RS13, AKR 13, MPJ 13, SMZ14,
     +
KGC 17]. There are even companies that offer analytics services on the information stored on ledgers [Ell13, Cha14].
   2For example, in Zerocash the single transition function is the one governing cash flow of a single currency.




                                                              3
1.1    Our contributions
We design, implement, and evaluate Zexe (Zero knowledge EXEcution), a ledger-based system that enables
users to execute offline computations and subsequently produce publicly-verifiable transactions that attest to
the correctness of these offline executions. Zexe simultaneously provides two main security properties.

• Privacy: a transaction reveals no information about the offline computation, except (an upper bound on)
  the number of consumed inputs and created outputs.3 One cannot link together multiple transactions by the
  same user or involving related computations, nor selectively censor transactions based on such information.

• Succinctness: a transaction can be validated in time that is independent of the cost of the offline
  computation whose correctness it attests to. Since all transactions are equally cheap to validate (they are all
  indistinguishable), there is no “Verifier’s Dilemma” nor a need for mechanisms such as gas.

Zexe also offers rich functionality, as offline computations in Zexe can be used to realize state transitions of
multiple applications (such as tokens, elections, markets) simultaneously running atop the same ledger. The
users participating in applications to do not have to trust, or even know of, one another. Zexe supports this
functionality by exposing a simple, yet powerful, shared execution environment with the following properties.

• Extensibility: users may execute arbitrary functions of their choice, without seeking anyone’s permission.

• Isolation: functions of malicious users cannot interfere with the computations and data of honest users.

• Inter-process communication: functions may exchange data with one another.

DPC schemes. The technical core of Zexe is a protocol for a new cryptographic primitive that we introduce,
decentralized private computation (DPC), a new approach to performing computations on a ledger. Informally,
DPC supports a simple, yet expressive, programming model in which units of data, which we call records,
contain within them scripts (arbitrary programs) that determine under what conditions they can be first created
and then consumed. The rules that dictate how these programs interact can be viewed as a “nano-kernel” that
provides a shared execution environment upon which to build applications. From a technical perspective, DPC
can be viewed as extending Zerocash [BCG+ 14] to the foregoing programming model, while still providing
strong privacy guarantees, not only within a single application (which is a straightforward extension) but also
across multiple co-existing applications (which requires new ideas that we discuss later on). The security
guarantees of DPC are captured via an ideal functionality, which our protocol provably achieves.
Applications. We demonstrate how to use DPC schemes to achieve privacy-preserving analogues of popular
applications: private user-defined assets, private DEXs, and private stablecoins. Our privacy guarantees in
particular protect against vulnerabilities of current DEX designs such as front-running [BDJT17, BBD+ 17].
See Section 6 for details.
Techniques for efficient implementation. We devise a set of techniques to achieve an efficient implementa-
tion of our DPC protocol, by drawing upon recent advances in zero knowledge succinct cryptographic proofs
(namely, zkSNARKs) and in recursive proof composition (proofs attesting to the validity of other proofs).
    Overall, transactions in Zexe with two input records and two output records are 968 bytes and can be
verified in tens of milliseconds, regardless of the offline computation; generating these transactions takes
less than a minute plus a time that grows with the offline computation (inevitably so). This implementation
is achieved in a modular fashion via a collection of Rust libraries (see Fig. 15), in which the top-level one
   3One can fix the number of inputs and outputs (say, fix both to 2), or carefully consider side channels that could arise from
revealing bounds on the number of inputs and outputs.


                                                               4
is libzexe. Our implementation also supports transactions with any number m of input records and n of
output records; transactions size in this case is 32m + 32n + 840 bytes (the transaction stores the serial
number of each input record and the commitment of each output record).
Delegating transactions. While verifying succinct cryptographic proofs is cheap, producing them can be
expensive. As the offline computation grows, the (time and space) cost of producing a cryptographic proof of
its correctness also grows, which could become infeasible for a user.
     To address this problem, we further obtain delegable DPC. The user communicates to an untrusted worker
worker details about the desired transaction, then the worker produces the transaction, and finally the user
authorizes it via a cheap computation (and in a way that does not violate indistinguishability of transactions).
This feature is particularly relevant for prospective real-world deployments, because it enables support for
weak devices, such as mobile phones or hardware tokens.
     In fact, our delegable DPC protocol also extends to support threshold transactions, which can be used
to improve operational security, and also to support blind transactions, which can be used to realize lottery
tickets for applications such as micropayments.
     All of these extensions are also part of our Rust library libzexe.
A perspective on costs. Zexe provides tolerable efficiency but is by no means a lightweight construction.
We have, after all, set ambitious goals: data/function privacy and succinctness, for a rich functionality, in a
threat model that requires security against all efficient adversaries. Relaxing any of these goals (assuming
rational adversaries or hardware enclaves, or compromising on privacy) will lead to more efficient approaches.
     In light of the foregoing ambitious goals, we have, in our opinion, managed to achieve excellent transaction
sizes (less than a kilobyte) and transaction verification times (tens of milliseconds).
     The primary cost in our system is, unsurprisingly, the cost of generating the cryptographic proofs that are
included in transactions. We have managed to keep this cost to roughly a minute plus a cost that grows with
the offline computation. For the applications mentioned above, these additional costs are negligible. Our
system thus supports applications of real-world interest today (e.g., private DEXs) with reasonable costs.

1.2   Related work
Avoiding naive re-execution. TrueBit [TR17], Plasma [PB17], and Arbitrum [KGC+ 18] avoid naive
re-execution by having users report the results of their computations without any cryptographic proofs, and
instead putting in place incentive mechanisms wherein others can challenge reported results. The user and
challenger engage in a so-called refereed game [FK97, CRR11, CRR13, JSST16, Rei16], mediated by a smart
contract acting as the referee, that efficiently determines which of the two was “telling the truth”. In contrast,
in this work correctness of computation is ensured by cryptography, regardless of any economic motives; we
thus protect against all efficient adversaries rather than merely all rational and efficient ones. Also, unlike our
DPC scheme, the above works do not provide formal guarantees of strong privacy (challengers must be able
to re-execute the computation leading to a result and in particular must know its potentially private inputs).
Private payments. Zerocash [BCG+ 14], building on earlier work [MGGR13], showed how to use distributed
ledgers to achieve payment systems with strong privacy guarantees. Informally, users encrypt payment details
and prove their validity, without disclosing what the payment details are. The Zerocash protocol, with some
modifications, is now commercially deployed in several currencies, including Zcash [ZCa15]. In Zerocash,
however, there is no support for scripting, that is, specifying small programs that dictate how funds can be
spent. Even more so, in Zerocash there is no support for complex financial logic, and more generally for
programming arbitrary state transitions like in smart contract systems such as Ethereum.



                                                        5
Privacy beyond payments. Hawk [KMS+ 16], combining ideas from Zerocash and the notion of an
evaluator-prover for multi-party computation, enables parties to conduct offline computations and then report
their results via cryptographic proofs. The privacy guarantee that Hawk achieves, known as transactional
privacy, protects the private inputs used in a computation (directly so from the proofs’ zero knowledge
property) but does not protect the information of which computation was carried out. That said, we view
Hawk as complementary to our work: a user in our system could in particular be a semi-trusted manager that
administers a multi-party computation and generates a transaction about its output. The privacy guarantees
provided in this work would hide which computation was carried out offline. Zether [BAZB19] is a system
that enables publicly known smart contracts to reason about homomorphic commitments in zero knowledge,
and in particular enables these to transact in a manner that hides transaction amounts; it does not hide the
identities of parties involved in the transaction, beyond a small anonymity set.
MPC with ledgers. Several works [ADMM14b, ADMM14a, KMB15, KB16, BKM17] have applied ledgers
to obtain secure multi-party protocols that have security properties that are difficult to achieve otherwise,
such as fairness. These approaches are complementary to our work, as any set of parties wishing to jointly
compute a certain function via one of these protocols could run the protocol “under” our DPC scheme in such
a way that third parties would not learn any information that such a multi-party computation is happening.
Hardware enclaves. Ekiden [CZK+ 18] is a ledger-based system that uses hardware enclaves, such as Intel
Software Guard Extensions [MAB+ 13], to achieve various integrity and privacy goals for smart contracts.
Beyond ledgers, several systems explore privacy goals in distributed systems by leveraging hardware enclaves;
see for example M2R [DSC+ 15], VC3 [SCF+ 15], and Opaque [ZDB+ 17]. All of these works are able to
efficiently support rich and complex computations. In this work, we make no use of hardware enclaves, and
instead rely entirely on cryptography. This means that on the one hand our performance overheads are more
severe, while on the other hand we protect against a richer class of adversaries (all efficient ones).




                                                     6
2     Techniques
We summarize the main ideas behind our contributions. Our goal is to design a ledger-based system in which
transactions attest to offline computations while simultaneously providing privacy and succinctness.
    We begin by noting that privacy is the “harder” of the two goals, since there is a straightforward folklore
approach that provides succinctness alone: each user accompanies the result reported in a transaction with a
succinct cryptographic proof (i.e., a SNARK) attesting to the result’s correctness. Others who validate the
transaction can then simply verify the cryptographic proof, and do not have to re-execute the computation. In
light of this, we shall first discuss how to achieve privacy, and then how to additionally achieve succinctness.
    The rest of this section is organized as follows. In Sections 2.1 and 2.2 we explain why achieving privacy
in our setting is challenging. In Section 2.3 we introduce the shared execution environment that we consider,
and in Section 2.4 we introduce decentralized private computation (DPC), a cryptographic primitive that
securely realizes it. In Section 2.5 we describe how we turn our ideas into an efficient implementation.

2.1   Achieving privacy for a single arbitrary function
Zerocash [BCG+ 14] is a protocol that achieves privacy for a specific functionality, namely, value transfers
within a single currency. Therefore, it is natural to consider what happens if we extend Zerocash from this
special case to the general case of a single arbitrary function that is known in advance to everybody.
Sketch of Zerocash. Money in Zerocash is represented via coins. The commitment of a coin is published
on the ledger when the coin is created, and its serial number is published when the coin is consumed. Each
transaction on the ledger attests that some “old” coins were consumed in order to create some “new” coins: it
contains the serial numbers of the consumed coins, commitments of the created coins, and a zero knowledge
proof attesting that the serial numbers belong to coins created in the past (without identifying which ones),
and that the commitments contain new coins of the same total value. A transaction is private because it
only reveals how many coins were consumed and how many were created, but no other information (each
coin’s value and owner address remain hidden). Also, revealing a coin’s serial number ensures that a coin
cannot be consumed more than once (the same serial number would appear twice). In sum, data in Zerocash
corresponds to coin values, and state transitions are the single invariant that monetary value is preserved.
Extending to an arbitrary function. One way to extend Zerocash to a single arbitrary function Φ (known
in advance to everybody) is to think of a coin as a record that stores some arbitrary data payload, rather than
just some integer value. The commitment of a record would then be published on the ledger when the record is
created, and its unique serial number would be published when the record is consumed. A transaction would
then contain serial numbers of consumed records, commitments of created records, and a proof attesting that
invoking the function Φ on (the payload of) the old records produces (the payload of) the new records.
     Data privacy holds because the ledger merely stores each record’s commitment (and its serial number
once consumed), and transactions only reveal that some number of old records were consumed in order to
create some number of new records in a way that is consistent with Φ. Function privacy also holds but for
trivial reasons: Φ is known in advance to everybody, and every transaction is about computations of Φ.
     Note that Zerocash is indeed a special case of the above: it corresponds to fixing Φ to the particular (and
publicly known) choice of a function Φ$ that governs value transfers within a single currency.
     However the foregoing protocol supports only a single hard-coded function Φ, while instead we want to
enable users to select their own functions, as we discuss next.




                                                       7
2.2   Difficulties with achieving privacy for user-defined functions
We want to enable users to execute functions of their choice concurrently on the same ledger, while maintaining
function privacy and without seeking prior permission from anyone. That is, when preparing a transaction, a
user may pick any function Φ of his choice for creating new records by consuming some old records.
    This alone can be achieved via the approach sketched in Section 2.1 by fixing a single function that is
universal, and then interpreting data payloads as user-defined functions that are provided as inputs. Indeed,
zero knowledge would ensure function privacy in this case. However merely allowing users to define their
own functions does not by itself yield meaningful functionality, as we explain next.
The problem: malicious functions. Users could devise functions to attack or disrupt other users’ functions
and data, so that a particular user would not know whether to trust records created by other users; indeed,
due to function privacy, he would not know what functions were used to create those records. For example,
suppose that we wanted to realize the special case of value transfers within a single currency (i.e., Zerocash).
One may believe that it would suffice to instruct users to pick the function Φ$ (or similar). But this does not
work: a user receiving a record claiming to contain, say, 1 unit of currency does not know if this record was
created via the function Φ$ from other such records and so on. A malicious user could have used a different
function to create that record, for example, one that illegally “mints” records that appear valid to Φ$ . More
generally, the lack of any enforced rules about how user-defined functions can interact precludes productive
cooperation between users that do not trust one another. We stress that this challenge arises specifically due to
function privacy, because if the function that created (the commitment of) a record was public knowledge,
users could decide for themselves if records they receive were generated by “good” functions.
One way to address the foregoing problem would be to augment records with an attribute that must equal
the identity of the function that created them, and then impose the restriction that in a valid transaction only
records created by the same function may participate. This new attribute is never revealed on the ledger (just
like a record’s payload), and the zero knowledge proof is tasked with ensuring that records participating in the
same transaction are all of the same “type”. This approach now does suffice to realize value transfers within a
single currency, by letting users select the function Φ$ . More generally, this approach generalizes that in
Section 2.1, and can be viewed as running multiple segregated “virtual ledgers” each with a fixed function.
Function privacy holds because one cannot tell if a transaction belongs to one virtual ledger or another.
The problem: limited functionality. The foregoing forbids any inter-process communication, and so one
cannot realize even simple functionalities like transferring value between different currencies on the same
ledger. This crude time sharing of the ledger is too limiting.

2.3   The records nano-kernel: a minimalist shared execution environment
The approaches in Section 2.2 lie at opposite extremes: unrestricted inter-process interactions cannot realize
even basic applications such as a single currency, while complete process segregation is too limiting.
    Balancing these extremes requires a shared execution environment, namely an operating system, that
manages user-defined functions: it provides process isolation, determines data ownership, handles inter-
process communication, and so on. Overall, processes must be able to concurrently share a ledger, without
violating the integrity or confidentiality of one another.
    However, function privacy (one of our goals) dictates that user-defined functions are hidden, which means
that an operating system cannot be maintained publicly atop the ledger (as in current smart contract systems)
but, instead, must be part of the statement proved in zero knowledge. This is unfortunate because designing an
operating system that governs interactions across user-defined functions within a zero knowledge proof is not
only a colossal design challenge but also entails many arbitrary design choices that we should not have to take.

                                                       8
    In light of the above, we choose to take the following approach: we formulate a minimalist shared
execution environment that imposes simple, yet expressive, rules on how records may interact. This execution
environment can be viewed as a “nano-kernel” that manages records, and can be summarized as follows.

     The records nano-kernel (RNK): In addition to a data payload, a record r will now contain two
     user-defined functions, or more precisely two user-defined predicates (boolean functions). These
     are a birth predicate Φb , which is executed when r is created, and a death predicate Φd , which is
     executed when r is consumed. By suitably programming r’s birth and death predicates, a user
     fully dictates the conditions under which r can be first created and later consumed.

     As before, a transaction in the ledger attests that some old records were consumed in order to create
new records. However, now it also attests that the old records’ death predicates and the new records’ birth
predicates were all simultaneously satisfied when given a certain common input. This input is the transaction’s
local data, which includes: (a) every record’s contents (such as its payload and the identity of its predicates);
(b) a piece of shared memory that is publicly revealed, called transaction memorandum; (c) a piece of shared
memory that is kept hidden, called auxiliary input; and (d) other construction specifics. See Fig. 3.
     In this way, each predicate can individually decide if the local data is valid according to its own logic. For
example, a record can protect itself from other records that contain “bad” birth or death predicates, because
the record’s predicates could refuse to accept when they detect (from reading the local data) that they are in a
transaction with records having bad predicates. At the same time, a record can interact with other records in
the same transaction when its predicates decide to accept, providing the flexibility that we seek. We briefly
illustrate this via an example, user-defined assets, whereby one can use birth predicates to define and transact
with their own assets, and also use death predicates to enforce custom access control policies over these assets.

Example 2.1 (user-defined assets). Consider records whose payloads encode an asset identifier id, the initial
asset supply v, and a value v. Fix the birth predicate in all such records to be a mint-or-conserve function
MoC that is responsible for creating the initial supply of a new asset, and then subsequently conserving the
value of the asset across all transactions. In more detail, MoC can be invoked in one of two modes. In mint
mode, given as input a desired initial supply v, MoC deterministically derives a fresh unique identifier id for
a new asset and stores (id, v, v = v) in a genesis record. In conserve mode, MoC inspects all records in a
transaction whose birth predicates equal to MoC and whose asset identifiers equal the identifier of the current
record, and ensures that among these records, the asset values are conserved.
    Users can program death predicates of records to enforce conditions on how assets can be consumed,
e.g., by realizing conditional exchanges with other counter-parties. Suppose that Alice wishes to exchange
100 units of an asset id1 for 50 units of another asset id2 , but does not have a counter-party for the exchange.
She creates a record r with 100 units of id1 whose death predicate enforces that any transaction consuming r
must also create another record, consumable by Alice, with 50 units of id1 . She then publishes out of band
information about r, and anyone can subsequently claim it by creating a transaction doing the exchange.
    Since death predicates can be arbitrary, many different access policies can also be realized, e.g., to enforce
that a transaction redeeming a record (a) must be authorized by two of three public keys, or (b) becomes valid
only after a given amount of time, or (c) must reveal the pre-image of a hash function.

    We discuss in more detail several applications in Section 6, including how to realize private decentralized
asset exchanges and regulation-friendly private stablecoins. We stress that the records nano-kernel is not
a scripting mechanism like Bitcoin’s but, is instead a framework that supports general computations. These
computations can be conducted within a single transaction, or across multiple transactions, by storing suitable
intermediate state/message data in record payloads, or by publishing that data in transaction memoranda (as

                                                        9
plaintext or ciphertext as needed). In this way, transactions can realize any state transition, with consumed
records being data loaded from memory, and created records being data stored back to memory.

2.4   Decentralized private computation
A new cryptographic primitive. We introduce a new cryptographic primitive called decentralized private
computation (DPC) schemes, which capture the notion of a ledger-based system where privacy-preserving
transactions attest to offline computations that follow the records nano-kernel. See Section 3 for the definition
of DPC schemes, including the ideal functionality that we use to express security.
    We construct a DPC scheme in Section 4, and prove it secure in Appendix A. We take Zerocash [BCG+ 14]
as a starting point, and then extend the protocol to support the records nano-kernel and also to facilitate
proving security in the simulation paradigm relative to an ideal functionality (rather than via a collection of
separate game-based definitions as in [BCG+ 14]). Below we sketch the construction.
Construction sketch. Each transaction in the ledger consumes some old records and creates new records in
a manner that is consistent with the records nano-kernel. To ensure privacy, a transaction only contains serial
numbers of the consumed records, commitments of the created records, and a zero knowledge proof attesting
that there exist records consistent with this information (and with the records nano-kernel). All commitments
on the ledger are collected in a Merkle tree, which facilitates efficiently proving that a commitment appears
on the ledger (by proving in zero knowledge the knowledge of a suitable authentication path). All serial
numbers on the ledger are collected in a list that cannot contain duplicates. This implies that a record cannot
be consumed twice because the same serial number is revealed each time a record is consumed. See Fig. 1.
     The record data structure is summarized in Fig. 2. Each record is associated to an address public key,
which is a commitment to a seed for a pseudorandom function acting as the corresponding address secret key;
addresses determine ownership of records, and in particular consuming a record requires knowing its secret
key. A record consists of an address public key, a data payload, a birth predicate, a death predicate, and a serial
number nonce; a record commitment is a commitment to all of these attributes. The serial number of a record
is the evaluation of a pseudorandom function, whose seed is the secret key for the record’s address public key,
evaluated at the record’s serial number nonce. A record’s commitment and serial number, which appear on
the ledger when the record is created and consumed, reveal no information about the record attributes. This
follows from the hiding properties of the commitment, and the pseudorandom properties of the serial number.
The derivation of a record’s serial number ensures that a user can create a record for another in such a way that
its serial number is fully determined and yet cannot be predicted without knowing the other user’s secret key.
     In order to produce a transaction, a user selects some previously-created records to consume, assembles
some new records to create (including their payloads and predicates), and decides on other aspects of the
local data such as the transaction memorandum (shared memory seen by all predicates and published on the
ledger) and the auxiliary input (shared memory seen by all predicates but not published on the ledger); see
Fig. 3. If the user knows the secret keys of the records to consume and if all relevant predicates are satisfied
(death predicates of old records and birth predicates of new predicates), then the user can produce a zero
knowledge proof to append to the transaction. See Fig. 4 for a summary of the NP statement being proved.
     In sum, a transaction only reveals the number of consumed records and number of created records, as
well as any data that was deliberately revealed in the transaction memorandum (possibly nothing).4
Achieving succinctness. Our discussions so far have focused on achieving (data and function) privacy.
However, we also want to achieve succinctness, namely, that a transaction can be validated in “constant time”.
This follows from a straightforward modification: we take the protocol that we have designed so far and use a
   4By supporting the use of dummy records, we can in fact ensure that only upper bounds on the foregoing numbers are revealed.


                                                             10
                        ledger
                        digest




                                                                                              record r                    cm     record commitment
                                                                                                                                                                       serial
                                       ...                            ...                                                                                             number
         all record commitments                   all serial numbers                                                  Commit                                            sn

                                                                                                 apk     payload          Φb      Φd          𝝆                       PRF
    ledger L           tx1 tx2 ... tx ... txt                                                  address     data          birth & death serial number
                                                                                              public key payload           predicates      nonce

                                                                                                                                                                      CRH
   sn1,...,snm           cm1,...,cmn              memo          stL                𝛑                             address secret key ask
 serial numbers commitments transaction ledger                                                Commit             skPRF PRF secret key                          unique info from
                                                 zkSNARK
 of old records of new records memorandum digest                                                                                                               tx that created r

               Figure 1: Construction of a transaction.                                                       Figure 2: Construction of a record.




                                 local data for predicate (ldata)                                        serial numbers commitments transaction ledger
                                                                                                                                                         zkSNARK
                                                                                                         of old records of new records memorandum digest
             record     serial  address     data             descriptions
           commitment numbers public keys payloads    of birth/death predicates
                                                                                                          sn1,...,snm       cm1,...,cmn          memo           stL         𝛑
                s
      data   cmold,1   snold,1  apkold,1 payloadold,1   Φb,old,1       Φd,old,1                          ∃ old records (rold,1, ..., rold,m)
 from old       ⋮         ⋮        ⋮          ⋮            ⋮              ⋮                                old secret keys (askold,1, ..., askold,m)
   records   cmold,m   snold,m apkold,m payloadold,m    Φb,old,m      Φd,old,m                             new records (rnew,1, ..., rnew,n)
      data     cmnew,1                   apknew,1     payloadnew,1          Φb,new,1   Φd,new,1            auxiliary input aux
from new           ⋮          n/a             ⋮             ⋮                  ⋮          ⋮              such that
   records     cmnew,n                   apknew,n     payloadnew,n          Φb,new,m   Φd,new,m            each old record rold,i
                                                                                                             - has a commitment that is in a ledger with digest stL
                         transaction                        common                                           - is owned by secret key askold,i
                                             memo                             aux
                       memorandum                          aux input                                         - has serial number sni
                                                                                                           each new record rnew,j has commitment cmj
             old death predicates Φd,old,1(ldata) = ꔇ = Φd,old,m(ldata) = 1                                each old death predicate Φold,d,i (in rold,i) is satisfied by local data
                                                                                                           each new birth predicate Φnew,b,j (in rnew,j) is satisfied by local data
             new birth predicates Φb,new,1(ldata) = ꔇ = Φb,new,n(ldata) = 1

                       Figure 3: Predicates receive local data.                                                       Figure 4: The execute statement.




                                                                                          11
zero knowledge succinct argument rather than just any zero knowledge proof. Indeed, the NP statement being
proved (summarized in Fig. 4) involves attesting the satisfiability of all (old) death and (new) birth predicates,
and thus we need to ensure that verifying the corresponding proof can be done in time that does not depend
on the complexity of these predicates. While turning this idea into an efficient implementation requires more
ideas (as we discuss in Section 2.5), the foregoing modification suffices from a theoretical point of view.
Delegation to an untrusted worker. In our DPC scheme, a user must produce, and include in the transaction,
a zero knowledge succinct argument that, among other things, attests that death predicates of consumed
records are satisfied and, similarly, that birth predicates of created records are satisfied. This implies that the
cost of creating a transaction grows with the complexity (and number of) predicates involved in the transaction.
Such a cost can quickly become infeasible for weak devices such as mobile phones or hardware tokens.
    We address this problem by enabling a user to delegate to an untrusted worker, such as a remote server,
the computation that produces a transaction. This notion, which we call a delegable DPC scheme, empowers
weak devices to produce transactions that they otherwise could not have produced on their own.
    The basic idea is to augment address keys in such a way that the secret information needed to produce the
cryptographic proof is separate from the secret information needed to authorize a transaction containing that
proof. Thus, the user can communicate to the worker the secrets necessary to generate a cryptographic proof,
while retaining the remaining secrets for authorizing this (and future) transactions. In particular, the worker
has no way to produce valid transactions that have not been authorized by the user.
    We use randomizable signatures to achieve the foregoing functionality, without violating either privacy or
succinctness. Informally, we modify a record’s serial number to be an unlinkable randomization of (part of)
the record’s address public key, and a user’s authorization of a transaction consists of signing the instance and
proof relative to every randomized key (i.e., serial number) in that transaction. See Section 5 for details.

2.5   Achieving an efficient implementation
Our system Zexe (Zero knowledge EXEcution) provides an implementation of two constructions: our “plain”
DPC protocol, and its extension to a delegable DPC protocol. Achieving efficiency in our system required
overcoming several challenges. Below we highlight some of these challenges, and explain how we addressed
them; see Sections 7 and 8 for details. The discussions below equally apply to both types of DPC protocols.
Avoiding the cost of universality. The NP statement that we need to prove involves checking user-defined
predicates, so it must support arbitrary computations that are not fixed in advance. However, state-of-the-art
zkSNARKs for universal computations rely on expensive tools [BCG+ 13, BCTV14, WSR+ 15, BCTV17].
    We address this problem by relying on one layer of recursive proof composition [Val08, BCCT13]. Instead
of tasking the NP statement with directly checking user-defined predicates, we only task it with checking
succinct proofs attesting to this. Checking these inner succinct proofs is a (relatively) inexpensive computation
that is fixed for all predicates, which can be “hardcoded” in the statement. Since the single outer succinct
proof produced does not reveal information about the inner succinct proofs attesting to predicates’ satisfiability
(thanks to zero knowledge), the inner succinct proofs do not have to hide what predicate was checked, so they
can be for NP statements tailored to the computations of particular user-defined predicates.
A bespoke recursion. Recursive proof composition has been empirically demonstrated for pairing-based
SNARKs [BCTV17]. We thus focus our attention on these, and explain the challenges that arise in our setting.
Recall that if we instantiate a SNARK’s pairing via an elliptic curve E defined over a prime field Fq and
having a subgroup of prime order r, then (a) the SNARK supports NP statements expressed as arithmetic
circuits over Fr , while (b) proof verification involves arithmetic operations over Fq . Being part of the NP
statement, the SNARK verifier must also be expressed as an arithmetic circuit over Fr , which is problematic


                                                       12
because the verifier’s “native” operations are over Fq . Simulating Fq operations via Fr operations is expensive,
and picking E such that q = r is impossible [BCTV17]. Prior work thus uses multiple curves [BCTV17]: a
two-cycle of pairing-friendly elliptic curves, that is, two prime-order curves E1 and E2 such that the prime
size of one’s base field is the prime order of the other’s group, and orchestrating SNARKs based on these so
that fields “match up”. However, known cycles are inefficient at 128 bits of security [BCTV17, CCW18].
     We address this problem by noting that we merely need “a proof of a proof”, and thus, instead of relying
on a cycle, we can use the Cocks–Pinch method [FST10] to set up a bounded recursion [BCTV17]. First we
pick a pairing-friendly elliptic curve that not only is suitable for 128 bits of security according to standard
considerations but, moreover, is compatible with efficient SNARK provers in both levels of the recursion.
Namely, letting p be the prime order of the base field and r the prime order of the group, we need that
both Fr and Fp have multiplicative subgroups whose orders are large powers of 2. The condition on Fr
ensures efficient proving for SNARKs over this curve, while the condition on Fp ensures efficient proving
for SNARKs that verify proofs over this curve. In light of the above, we select a curve EBLS from the
Barreto–Lynn–Scott (BLS) family [BLS02, CLN11] with embedding degree 12. This family not only enables
parameters that conservatively achieve 128 bits of security, but also enjoys properties that facilitate very
efficient implementation [AFK+ 12]. We ensure that both Fr and Fp have multiplicative subgroups of order
2α for α ≥ 40, by a suitable condition on the parameter of the BLS family.
     Next we use the Cocks–Pinch method to pick a pairing-friendly elliptic curve ECP over a field Fq such
that the curve group ECP (Fq ) contains a subgroup of prime order p (the size of EBLS ’s base field). Since the
method outputs a prime q that has about 2× more bits than the desired p, and in turn p has about 1.5× more
bits than r (due to properties of the BLS family), we only need ECP to have embedding degree of 6 in order
to achieve 128 bits of security (as determined from the guidelines in [FST10]).
     In sum, a SNARK over EBLS is used to generate proofs of predicates’ satisfiability; after that a zkSNARK
over ECP is used to generate proofs that these prior proofs are valid along with the remaining NP statement’s
checks. The matching fields between the two curves ensure that the former proofs can be efficiently verified.
Minimizing operations over ECP . While the curve ECP facilitates efficient checking of SNARK proofs
over EBLS , operations on it are at least 2× more costly (in time and space) than operations over EBLS , simply
because ECP ’s base field is twice the size of EBLS ’s base field. This makes checks in the NP relation Re that
are not related to proof checking unnecessarily expensive.
    To avoid this, we split Re into two NP relations, RBLS and RCP . The latter is responsible only for
verifying proofs of predicates’ satisfaction, while the former is responsible for all other checks. We minimize
the number of ECP operations by proving satisfaction of RBLS and RCP with zkSNARKs over EBLS and
ECP respectively. A transaction now includes both proofs.
Optimizing the NP statement. We note that the remaining NP statement’s checks can themselves be quite
expensive, as they range from verifying authentication paths in a Merkle tree to verifying commitment
openings, and from evaluating pseudorandom functions to evaluating collision resistant functions. Prior work
realizing similar collections of checks required upwards of four million gates [BCG+ 14] to express such
checks. This not only resulted in high latencies for producing transactions (several minutes) but also resulted
in large public parameters for the system (hundreds of megabytes).
     Commitments and collision-resistant hashing can be expressed as very efficient arithmetic circuits if one
opts for Pedersen-type constructions over suitable Edwards elliptic curves (and techniques derived from these
ideas are now part of deployed systems [HBHW18]). To achieve this, we pick two Edwards curves, EEd/BLS
over the field Fr (thereby matching the group order of EBLS ), and EEd/CP over the field Fp (thereby matching
the group order of ECP ). This allows to realise very efficient circuits for various primitives used in our NP
relations, including commitments, collision-resistant hashing, and randomizable signatures. Overall, we


                                                      13
obtain highly optimized realizations of all checks in Fig. 4.

2.6   Deployment considerations
DPC schemes include a setup algorithm that specifies how to sample public parameters, which are used to
produce transactions and to verify transactions. The setup algorithm in our DPC construction (see Section 4)
simply consists of running the setup algorithms for the various cryptographic building blocks that we rely on:
commitment schemes, collision-resistant hash functions, and zero knowledge proofs.
    In practice, deploying cryptography that relies on setup algorithms (such as DPC schemes) can be
challenging because the entity running the setup algorithm may be able to break certain security properties
of the scheme, by abusing knowledge of the randomness used to produce the public parameters. On the
other hand, some setup algorithm is typically inevitable. For example, non-interactive zero knowledge proofs
without any setup exist only for languages decidable in polynomial time [GO94]. Nevertheless, one could still
aim for a transparent setup, one that consists of public randomness, because in practice it is cheaper to realize.
    Our construction of a DPC scheme has a transparent setup algorithm whenever the setup algorithms for
the underlying cryptographic building blocks also have transparent setups. For example, this would hold
if we instantiated our construction via Pedersen commitments, Pedersen hash functions, and transparent
zkSNARKs (as obtained from probabilistic checking tools in the random oracle model [Mic00, BCS16]).
    However, due to efficiency considerations described in Section 2.5, our implemented system relies on
pairing-based zkSNARKs whose setup is not transparent. (We use the simulation-extractable zkSNARK of
Groth and Maller [GM17].) We should thus discuss how one may deploy our implemented system.
    Recall that prior zkSNARK deployments have used secure multiparty computation [BCG+ 15, ZCa16,
BGM17, BGG18], so that the sampled public parameters are guaranteed to be secure as long as even a
single participating party is honest. One could leverage these same ideas to sample “master” parameters for
proving/verifying the two NP relations RBLS and RCP (over the two elliptic curves EBLS and ECP ) mentioned
in Section 2.5. Note that these public parameters do not depend on any user-defined functions (birth or death
predicates), and can thus be sampled once and for all regardless of which applications will run over the system.
Note also that these public parameters must be trusted by everyone, because if they were compromised then
the security of all applications running over the system would be compromised as well.
    The foregoing public parameters are not the only ones that need to be sampled in order to use our
implemented system. Every (birth or death) predicate requires its own public parameters, because (the
verification key contained in) these public parameters is part of the record that contains it, and is ultimately
used to recursively check a proof of the predicate’s satisfiability. Since an application relies only on the public
parameters of certain predicates, we call such parameters as “application” parameters.
    Unlike “master” parameters, “application” parameters do not have to be sampled at the start of the
system’s lifetime, and also do not have to be trusted by every user in the system. Indeed, interactions across
records are overseen by the NP relations RBLS and RCP (which rely on the “master” parameters) and thus
compromised parameters for one application will not affect an application that does not rely on them. This
means that a user only needs to trust the parameters that are relied upon by the applications that the user cares
about. In turn this means that the sampling of application parameters can be viewed as an organic process,
which occurs as applications are developed and deployed, and each application can be in charge of deciding
whichever method is most suitable for securely sampling its own parameters.
    Very recent works [MBKM19, CFQ19] have proposed pairing-based SNARKs that have a universal setup
that can be used for any circuit. As these SNARK constructions mature into efficient implementations, our
system could use these instead of [GM17] to mitigate the above concerns.



                                                       14
 3         Definition of decentralized private computation schemes
 We define decentralized private computation (DPC) schemes, a cryptographic primitive in which parties with
 access to an ideal append-only ledger execute computations offline and subsequently post privacy-preserving,
 publicly-verifiable transactions that attest to the correctness of these offline executions. This primitive
 generalizes prior notions [BCG+ 14] that were limited to proving correctness of simple financial invariants.
     Below we introduce the data structures, interface, and security requirements for a DPC scheme: Section 3.1
 describes the main data structures of a DPC scheme, Section 3.2 defines the syntax of the DPC algorithms, and
 finally in Section 3.3 we describe the security requirements for DPC schemes via an ideal functionality. We
 note that our definition of DPC schemes focuses on (correctness and) privacy, because we leave succinctness
 as a separate efficiency goal that easily follows from suitable building blocks (see Remark 4.1).

 3.1          Data structures
 In a DPC scheme there are three main data structures: records, transactions, and the ledger.
  Records. A record, denoted by the symbol r, is a data structure representing a unit of data. Records can
  be created or consumed, and these events denote state changes in the system. For example, in a currency
  application, records store units of the currency, and state changes represent the flow of units in that currency.
        In more detail, a record r has the following attributes (see Fig. 5): (a) a commitment cm, which binds
  together all other attributes of r while hiding all information about them; (b) an address public key apk, which
  specifies the record’s owner; (c) a payload payload containing arbitrary application-dependent information;
  (d) a birth predicate Φb that must be satisfied when r is created; (e) a death predicate Φd that must be
  satisfied when r is consumed; and (f) other construction-specific information. Both Φb and Φd are arbitrary
  non-deterministic boolean-valued functions. The payload payload contains a designated subfield isDummy
  which denotes whether r is dummy or not.
        Informally, the “life” of a (non-dummy) record r is marked by two events: birth and death. The record r
  is born (or is created) when its commitment cm is posted to the ledger as part of a transaction. Then the
  record r dies (or is consumed) when its serial number sn appears on the ledger as part of a later transaction.
  At each of these times (birth or death) the corresponding predicate (Φb or Φd ) must be satisfied. Dummy
  records, on the other hand, can be created freely, but consuming them requires satisfaction of their death
  predicates. The purpose of dummy records is solely to enable the creation of new non-dummy records.
        To consume r, one must also know the address secret key ask corresponding to r’s address public key apk
  because the serial number sn to be revealed can only be computed from r and ask. The ledger forbids the
  same serial number to appear more than once, so that: (a) a record cannot be consumed twice because it is
  associatedserial to  exactly
                   numbers       one serial
                             commitments         number; (b)
                                             transaction          others cannot prevent one from consuming a record because it is
                                                         construction
transaction
  computationally
            of old records infeasible
                            of new recordstomemorandum
                                             create two specifics
                                                           distinct records that share the same serial number sn but have distinct
    tx        sn1,...,snm     cm1,...,cm0n     memo           ...
  commitments           cm and     cm .
                record    address     data    birth     death   construction
     record
              commitment public key payload predicate predicate   specifics
       r          cm         apk        payload       Φb   Φd        ...

                                                                                              serial numbers commitments transaction construction
                              ask             sn                                transaction
                                                                                              of old records of new records memorandum specifics
                            address          serial
                           secret key       number                                  tx         sn1,...,snm     cm1,...,cmn          memo      ...


                        Figure 5: Diagram of a record.                                                   Diagram of a
                                                                                                record 6: address
                                                                                               Figure                 datatransaction.
                                                                                                                                birth   death   construction
                                                                                    record
                                                                                              commitment public key payload predicate predicate   specifics
                                                                                         r        cm           apk        payload       Φb   Φd      ...


                                                                                                                ask             sn
                                                                           15                                 address          serial
                                                                                                             secret key       number
Transactions. A transaction, denoted by the symbol tx, is a data structure representing a state change that
involves the consumption and creation of records (see Fig. 6). It is a tuple ([sni ]m              n
                                                                                         1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?) where
(a) [sni ]m                                                               n
          1 is the list of serial numbers of the m old records, (b) [cmj ]1 is the list of commitments of the n new
records, (c) memo is an arbitrary string associated with the transaction, and (d) ? is other construction-specific
information. The transaction tx reveals only the following information about old and new records: (i) the old
records’ serial numbers; (ii) the new records’ commitments; and (iii) the fact that the death predicates of all
consumed records and birth predicates of all new records were satisfied.
     Anyone can assemble a transaction and append it to the ledger, provided that it is “valid” in the sense that
(all records are well-formed and) the death predicates of any consumed records and the birth predicates of any
created records are satisfied. Note that all transactions reveal the number of old records (m) and the number
of new records (n), but not how many of these were dummy or not.
Ledger. We consider a model where all parties have access to an append-only ledger, denoted L, that stores
all published transactions. Our definitions (and constructions) are agnostic to how this ledger is realized (e.g.,
the ledger may be centrally managed or a distributed protocol). When an algorithm needs to interact with the
ledger, we specify L in the algorithm’s superscript. The ledger exposes the following interface.

• L.Len: Return the number of transactions currently on the ledger.
• L.Push(tx): Append a (valid) transaction tx to the ledger.
• L.Digest → stL : Return a (short) digest of the current state of the ledger.
• L.ValidateDigest(stL ) → b: Check that stL is a valid digest for some (past) ledger state.
• L.Contains(tx) → b: Determine if tx (or a subcomponent thereof) appears on the ledger or not.
• L.Prove(tx) → wL : If a transaction tx (or a subcomponent thereof) appears on the ledger, return a proof
  of membership wL for it. If there are duplicates, return a proof for the lexicographically first one.
• L.Verify(stL , tx, wL ) → b: Check that wL certifies that tx (or a subcomponent thereof) is in a ledger with
  digest stL .

We stress that only “valid” transactions can be appended to the ledger. While the full definition of a valid
transaction is implementation dependent, in all cases it must be that the commitments and serial numbers in a
transaction (including any appearing in the ? field of a transaction) do not already appear on the ledger.

3.2   Algorithms
A DPC scheme is a tuple of algorithms (some of which may read information from L):

                              DPC = (Setup, GenAddress, ExecuteL , VerifyL ) .

The syntax and semantics of these algorithms are informally described below.

 Setup: DPC.Setup(1λ ) → pp.
 On input a security parameter 1λ , DPC.Setup outputs public parameters pp for the system. A trusted party
 runs this algorithm once and then publishes its output; afterwards the trusted party is not needed anymore.
 For some constructions, the trusted party can be replaced by an efficient multiparty computation that securely
 realizes the DPC.Setup algorithm (see [BCG+ 15, ZCa16, BGM17, BGG18] for how this has been done in
 some systems); in other constructions, the trusted party may not be needed, as the public parameters may
 simply consist of a random string of a certain length.



                                                         16
 Create address: DPC.GenAddress(pp) → (apk, ask).
 On input public parameters pp, DPC.GenAddress outputs an address key pair (apk, ask). Any user may
 run this algorithm to create an address key pair. Each record is bound to an address public key, and the
 corresponding secret key is used to consume it.

 Execute: Any user may invoke DPC.Execute to consume records and create new ones.
                                      public parameters
                                                          
                                                                      pp
                                                                           m
                           old records                               [ri ]1
                                                                             m
                                                                                   
                           old address secret keys                   [aski ]1     
                                                                              n
                           new address public keys
                                                                                  
                                                                      [apkj ]1                                    n
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                         new records
                                                                                   
                         L                                                      n                            [rj ]1
              DPC.Execute  new record payloads                       [payloadj ]1  →
                                                                                         transaction           tx
                                                                                                                            .
                           new record birth predicates                      n
                                                                      [Φb,j ]1     
                                                                             n
                           new record death predicates
                                                                                  
                                                                      [Φd,j ]1     
                           auxiliary predicate input                 aux
                                                                                   
                                      transaction memorandum          memo

 Given as input a list of old records [ri ]m                                       m
                                           1 with corresponding secret keys [aski ]1 , attributes for new records,
 private auxiliary input aux to birth and death predicates of new and old records respectively,5 and an
 arbitrary transaction memorandum memo, DPC.Execute produces new records [rj ]n1 and a transaction tx.
 The transaction attests that the input records’ death predicates and the output records’ birth predicates are all
 satisfied. The user subsequently pushes tx to the ledger by invoking L.Push(tx).

 Verify: DPC.VerifyL (pp, tx) → b.
 On input public parameters pp and a transaction tx, and given oracle access to the ledger L, DPC.Verify
 outputs a bit b denoting whether the transaction tx is valid relative to the ledger L.

3.3    Security
Informally, a DPC scheme achieves the following security goals.
• Execution correctness. Malicious parties cannot create valid transactions if the death predicate of some
  consumed record or the birth predicate of some created record is not satisfied.
• Execution privacy. Transactions reveal only the information revealed in the memorandum field, a bound on
  the number of consumed records, and a bound on the number of created records.6 All other information
  is hidden, including the payloads and predicates of all involved records. For example, putting aside the
  information revealed in the memorandum (which is arbitrary), one cannot link a transaction that consumes
  a record with the prior transaction that created it.
• Consumability. Every record can be consumed at least once and at most once by parties that know its
  secrets. Thus, a malicious party cannot create two valid records for another party such that only one of
  them can be consumed. (This captures security against “faerie-gold” attacks [HBHW18].)
• Transaction non-malleability. Malicious parties cannot modify a transaction “in flight” to the ledger.
Formally, we prove standalone security against static corruptions, in a model where every party has private
anonymous channels to all other parties [IKOS06].7 (In Appendix C we discuss how to prove security under
   5In addition to the “global” auxiliary input aux, each predicate may also take as input a “local” auxiliary input that is not
(necessarily) shared with other predicates. For simplicity, we make these local inputs implicit.
   6And any information implied by knowing that the birth (resp., death) predicates of consumed (resp., created) records are satisfied.
   7Parties can, e.g., use these channels to communicate the contents of newly created records to other parties.


                                                                 17
composition and against adaptive corruptions.) In more detail, we capture security of a DPC scheme via a
simulation-based security definition that is akin to UC security [Can01], but restricted to a single execution.
Definition 3.1. A DPC scheme DPC is secure if for every efficient real-world adversary A there exists an
efficient ideal-world simulator SA such that for every efficient environment E the following are computationally
indistinguishable:
• the output of E when interacting with the adversary A in a real-world execution of DPC in a model where
   parties can communicate with other parties via private anonymous channels; and
• the output of E when interacting with the simulator SA in an ideal-world execution with the ideal functionality
   FDPC specified in Fig. 7 (and further described below).
    We describe the data structures used by the ideal functionality FDPC , the internal state of FDPC , and the
interface offered by FDPC to parties in the ideal-world execution.
Ideal data structures. The ideal functionality FDPC uses ideal counterparts of a DPC scheme’s data structures.
An address public key apk denotes the owner of an ideal record r, which is a tuple (cm, apk, payload, Φb , Φd ),
where cm is its commitment, apk is its address public key, payload is its payload, and Φb and Φd are its birth
and death predicates. The record is also associated with a unique identifier (or serial number) sn. We require
that apk, cm, and sn are “globally unique”; this means that there cannot be two different ideal records r and
r0 having the same commitments or serial numbers.
    The distribution of these components is specified by the simulator S as follows. Before the ideal execution
begins, S specifies three functions (SampleAddrPk, SampleCm, SampleSn) that, on input a random string,
sample (apk, cm, sn) respectively. When FDPC needs to sample one of these, it invokes the respective
functions. (Note that FDPC cannot directly ask S to sample these because that would reveal to S when an
honest party was invoking FDPC .GenAddress or FDPC .Execute, and we cannot afford this leakage.)
Internal state. The ideal functionality FDPC maintains several internal tables.
• Addr, which stores address public keys.
• AddrUsers, which maps an address public key to the set of parties that are authorized to use it.
• Records, which maps a record’s commitment to that record’s information (address public key, payload,
  birth predicate, and death predicates).
• RecUsers, which maps a record’s commitment to the set of parties that are authorized to consume it. Note
  that, for a record r, the set RecUsers[r.cm] can be different from the set in AddrUsers[r.apk], but a party P
  has to be in both sets to consume r.
• SerialNumbers, which maps a record’s commitment to that record’s (unique) serial number.
• State, which maps a record’s commitment to that record’s state, either alive or dead.
Ideal algorithms. The ideal functionality FDPC provides the following interface to parties.
• Address generation: FDPC .GenAddress outputs a new address public key apk.
• Execution: FDPC .Execute performs an execution that consumes old records and creates new records.
  All parties are notified that an execution has occurred, and learn the serial numbers of input records,
  commitments of output records, and the transaction memorandum memo. Concurrent FDPC .Execute calls
  are serialized arbitrarily.
• Record consumption authorization: FDPC .ShareRecord allows a party P to authorize another party P 0 to
  consume a record r (provided that P 0 is also authorized to use r’s address public key).
Operation of honest parties. In both the real and ideal executions, the environment E can send instructions
to honest parties. These instructions can be one of GenAddress, Execute, or ShareRecord. In the real world
honest parties translate these instructions into corresponding invocations of DPC algorithms (or messages
sent via private anonymous channels as in the case of ShareRecord), while in the ideal world they translate

                                                       18
them into corresponding invocations of FDPC algorithms. In both worlds, honest parties immediately invoke
ShareRecord on records obtained from an Execute instruction. Finally, in the ideal world, when invoking
FDPC , honest parties do not provide any inputs marked as optional; instead, they let FDPC sample these.
Intuition. We explain how FDPC enforces the informal security notions described at this section’s beginning.

• Execution correctness. FDPC .Execute ensures that the death predicates of consumed records and birth
  predicates of created records are satisfied by the local data. Note that each predicate receives its own
  position as input so that it knows to which record in the local data it belongs.
• Execution privacy. Transactions contain serial numbers [sni ]m1 of consumed records, commitments [cmj ]1
                                                                                                              n

  of created records, and a memorandum memo. Serial numbers and commitments are sampled via SampleSn
  and SampleCm, so they are independent of the contents of any record, and thus reveal no information about
  them. Transactions thus reveal no information (beyond what is contained in memo).
• Consumability. From the point of view of FDPC , two records are different if and only if they have different
  commitments. In such a case, both records can be consumed as long as their death predicates are satisfied.
  If a DPC scheme realizes FDPC , then it must satisfy this same requirement: if two valid records have distinct
  commitments, then they must both be consumable.
• Transaction non-malleability. The adversary has no power to modify the inputs to, or output of, an honest
  party’s invocation of FDPC .Execute.




                                                      19
FDPC .GenAddress[P] (optional) address public key apk                                           record              r
                                                                                                                      
                                                                    FDPC .ShareRecord[P]                              0
1. Sample randomness r for generating address public key.                                       recipient party P
2. If apk = ⊥ then apk ← SampleAddrPk(r).                            1. If Records[r.cm] 6= ⊥:
3. Check that apk is unique: Addr[apk] = ⊥.                             (a) Check that P ∈ RecUsers[r.cm].
4. Set Addr[apk] := r.                                                  (b) Retrieve ((cm, apk, payload, Φb , Φd ), r) := Records[r.cm].
                                                                             0
5. If P is corrupted: set S to be the set of corrupted parties.      2. If P is corrupted: set S to
                                                                                                   be0 the set of corrupted parties.
                                                                             0
6. If P is honest: set S := {P}.                                     3. If P is honest: set S := P .
7. Set AddrUsers[apk] := AddrUsers[apk] ∪ S.                         4. Set RecUsers[r.cm] := RecUsers[r.cm] ∪ S.
                                                                                             0                  0
8. Send to P: address public key apk.                                5. If P is honest and P isn’t, Send to P : (RecordAuth, (r, r)).
                                                                                         0
                                                                     6. Else, Send to P : (RecordAuth, r).
                                                                       m
                          old records                             [ri ]1
                                                                                 
                                                                         m
                       (optional) old serial numbers             [sni ]1         
                       (optional) new record commitments
                                                                         n       
                                                                  [cmj ]1         
                       new address public keys
                                                                         n       
                                                                  [apkj ]1        
                                                                               n 
                       new record payloads
                                                                                 
FDPC .Execute[P]                                                 [payloadj ]1 
                       new record birth predicates                       n
                                                                  [Φb,j ]1        
                       new record death predicates                       n
                                                                                 
                                                                 [Φd,j ]1        
                                                                                  
                       auxiliary predicate input                 aux             
                          transaction memorandum                     memo
1. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}:
    (a) Sample randomness ri .
    (b) If sni = ⊥ then generate serial number: sni ← SampleSn(ri ).
    (c) Check that sni is unique: SerialNumbers[sni ] = ⊥.
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
    (a) Sample randomness rj .
    (b) If cmj = ⊥ then generate commitment: cmj ← SampleCm(rj ).
    (c) Check that cmj is unique: Records[cmj ] = ⊥.
    (d) Construct record: rj := (cmj , apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j ).
                                         m         m        n
3. Define the local data ldata := ([ri ]1 , [sni ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux, memo).
4. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}:
    (a) Parse ri as (cmi , apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i ).
    (b) Check that, for some randomness ri , old record ri exists: ((apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i ), ri ) = Records[cmi ].
    (c) Check that P is authorized to use apki : P ∈ AddrUsers[apki ].
    (d) If payloadi .isDummy = 0:
            i. Check that record is unconsumed: State[ri ] = alive.
           ii. Check that P is authorized to consume ri : P ∈ RecUsers[cmi ].
          iii. Check that P is authorized to use apki : P ∈ AddrUsers[apki ].
    (e) Check that death predicate is satisfied: Φd,i (ikldata) = 1.
    (f) Mark it as consumed: State[cmi ] := dead.
5. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
    (a) Check that birth predicate is satisfied: Φb,j (jkldata) = 1.
    (b) Insert new record rj : Records[cmj ] := ((apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j ), rj ).
    (c) Mark new record as unconsumed: State[cmj ] := alive.
                       n
6. Send to P: ([rj ]1 ).
                                           m          n
7. Send to all parties: (Execute, [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).

                                       Figure 7: Ideal functionality FDPC of a DPC scheme.




                                                                   20
4     Construction of decentralized private computation schemes
We describe our construction of a DPC scheme. In Section 4.1 we introduce the building blocks that we use,
and in Section 4.2 we describe each algorithm in the scheme. The security proof is provided in Appendix A.
We also describe some extensions of our construction, in functionality and in security, in Appendix C.

4.1   Building blocks
CRHs. A collision-resistant hash function CRH = (Setup, Eval) works as follows.
• Setup: on input a security parameter, CRH.Setup samples public parameters ppCRH .
• Hashing: on input public parameters ppCRH and message m, CRH.Eval outputs a short hash h of m.
Given public parameters ppCRH ← CRH.Setup(1λ ), it is computationally infeasible to find distinct inputs x
and y such that CRH.Eval(ppCRH , x) = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , y).
PRFs. A pseudorandom function family PRF = {PRFx : {0, 1}∗ → {0, 1}O(|x|) }x , where x denotes the
seed, is computationally indistinguishable from a random function family.
Commitments. A commitment scheme CM = (Setup, Commit) enables a party to generate a (perfectly)
hiding and (computationally) binding commitment to a given message.
• Setup: on input a security parameter, CM.Setup samples public parameters ppCM .
• Commitment: on input public parameters ppCM , message m, and randomness rcm , CM.Commit outputs a
   commitment cm to m.
We also use a trapdoor commitment scheme TCM = (Setup, Commit), with the same syntax as above.
Auxiliary algorithms (beyond those in CM) enable producing a trapdoor and using it to open a commitment,
originally to an empty string, to an arbitrary message. These algorithms are used only in the proof of security,
and so we introduce them there (see Appendix A).
NIZKs. Non-interactive zero knowledge arguments of knowledge enable a party, known as the prover, to
convince another party, known as the verifier, about knowledge of the witness for an NP statement without
revealing any information about the witness (besides what is already implied by the statement being true).
This primitive is a tuple NIZK = (Setup, Prove, Verify) with the following syntax.
• Setup: on input a security parameter and the specification of an NP relation R, NIZK.Setup outputs a set
   of public parameters ppNIZK (also known as a common reference string).
• Proving: on input ppNIZK and an instance-witness pair (x, w) ∈ R, NIZK.Prove outputs a proof π.
• Verifying: on input ppNIZK , instance x, and proof π, NIZK.Verify outputs a decision bit.
Completeness states that honestly generated proofs make the verifier accept; (computational) proof of
knowledge states that if the verifier accepts a proof for an instance then the prover “knows” a witness for it;
and perfect zero knowledge states that honestly generated proofs can be perfectly simulated, when given a
trapdoor to the public parameters. In fact, we require a strong form of (computational) proof of knowledge
known as simulation-extractability, which states that proofs continue to be proofs of knowledge even when
the adversary has seen prior simulated proofs. For more details, see [Sah99, DDO+ 01, Gro06].
Remark 4.1. If NIZK is additionally succinct (i.e., it is a simulation-extractable zkSNARK) then the DPC
scheme constructed in this section is also succinct. This is the case in our implementation; see Section 8.

4.2   Algorithms
Pseudocode for our construction of a DPC scheme is in Fig. 8. The construction involves invoking zero
knowledge proofs for the NP relation Re described in Fig. 9. The text below is a summary of the construction.

                                                      21
System setup. DPC.Setup is a wrapper around the setup algorithms of cryptographic building blocks. It
invokes CM.Setup, TCM.Setup, CRH.Setup, and NIZK.Setup to obtain (plain and trapdoor) commitment
public parameters ppCM and ppTCM , CRH public parameters ppCRH , and NIZK public parameters for the NP
relation Re (see Fig. 9). It then outputs pp := (ppCM , ppTCM , ppCRH , ppe ).
Address creation. DPC.GenAddress constructs an address key pair as follows. The address secret key
ask = (skPRF , rpk ) consists of a secret key skPRF for the pseudorandom function PRF, and commitment
randomness rpk . The address public key apk is a perfectly hiding commitment to skPRF with randomness rpk .
Execution. DPC.Execute produces a transaction attesting that some old records [ri ]m 1 were consumed
                          n
and some new records [rj ]1 were created, and that their death and birth predicates were satisfied. First,
DPC.Execute computes a ledger membership witness and serial number for every old record. Then,
DPC.Execute invokes the following auxiliary function to create record commitments for the new records.

  DPC.ConstructRecord(pp, apk, payload, Φb , Φd , ρ) → (r, cm)
  1. Sample new commitment randomness r.
  2. Construct new record commitment:   cm ← TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apkkpayloadkΦb, kΦd, kρ; r).
                                   address public key apk       payload payload comm. rand.
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                 r
  3. Construct new record r :=                                                                         .
                                 serial number nonce ρ        predicates (Φb , Φd ) commitment   cm
  4. Output (r, cm).


Information about all records, secret addresses of old records, the desired transaction memorandum memo,
and desired auxiliary predicate input aux are collected into the local data ldata (see Fig. 9).
    Finally, DPC.Execute produces a proof that all records are well-formed and that several conditions hold.

• Old records are properly consumed, namely, for every old record ri ∈ [ri ]m
                                                                            1 :
  – (if ri is not dummy) ri exists, demonstrated by checking a ledger membership witness for ri ’s commitment;
  – ri has not been consumed, demonstrated by publishing ri ’s serial number sni ;
  – ri ’s death predicate Φd,i is satisfied, demonstrated by checking that Φd,i (ikldata) = 1.

• New records are property created, namely, for every new record rj ∈ [rj ]n1 :
  – rj ’s serial number is unique, achieved by generating the nonce ρj as CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm );
  – rj ’s birth predicate Φb,j is satisfied, demonstrated by checking that Φb,j (jkldata) = 1.

The serial number sn of a record r relative to an address secret key ask = (skPRF , rpk ) is derived by evaluating
PRF at r’s serial number nonce ρ with seed skPRF . This ensures that sn is pseudorandom even to a party
that knows all of r but not ask (e.g., to a party that created the record for some other party). Note that each
predicate receives its own position as input so that it knows to which record in the local data it belongs.




                                                        22
 DPC.Setup                                                               DPC.GenAddress
                             λ
 Input: security parameter 1                                             Input: public parameters pp
 Output: public parameters pp                                            Output: address key pair (apk, ask)
1. Generate commitment parameters:                                      1. Sample secret key skPRF for pseudorandom function PRF.
                        λ                          λ
   ppCM ← CM.Setup(1 ), ppTCM ← TCM.Setup(1 ).                          2. Sample randomness rpk for commitment scheme CM.
                                                     λ
2. Generate CRH parameters: ppCRH ← CRH.Setup(1 ).                      3. Set address public key
3. Generate NIZK parameters for Re (see Figure 9):                         apk := CM.Commit(ppCM , skPRF ; rpk ).
                        λ
   ppe ← NIZK.Setup(1 , Re ).                                           4. Set address secret key ask := (skPRF , rpk ).
4. Output pp := (ppCM , ppTCM , ppCRH , ppe ).                          5. Output (apk, ask).
                  L
 DPC.Execute
 Input:
   • public
          parameters pp m
            records [ri ]1
   • old                               m
            address secret keys [aski ]1
                                         n
             address public keys [apkj ]1
          
          
                                          n
             record payloads [payloadj ]1
          
          
   • new                                    n
            record birth predicates [Φb,j ]1
                                             n
             record death predicates [Φd,j ]1
          
          
   • auxiliary predicate input aux
   • transaction memorandum memo
                           n
 Output: new records [rj ]1 and transaction tx
1. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, process the i-th old record as follows:
                                      address public key apki          payload payloadi       comm. rand. ri
                                                                                                             
    (a) Parse old record ri as                                                                                 .
                                    serial number nonce ρi          predicates (Φb,i , Φd,i ) commitment cmi
    (b) If payloadi .isDummy = 1, set ledger membership witness wL,i := ⊥.
        If payloadi .isDummy = 0, compute ledger membership witness for commitment: wL,i ← L.Prove(cmi ).
    (c) Parse address secret key aski as (skPRF,i , rpk,i ).
    (d) Compute serial number: sni ← PRFskPRF,i (ρi ).
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, construct the j-th new record as follows:
    (a) Compute serial number nonce: ρj := CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
    (b) Construct new record: (rj , cmj ) ← DPC.ConstructRecord(ppTCM , apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj ).
3. Retrieve current ledger digest: stL ← L.Digest.
                                                       m        n
4. Construct instance xe for Re : xe := (stL , [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
                                                 m         m        m       n
5. Construct witness we for Re : we := ([ri ]1 , [wL,i ]1 , [aski ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux).
6. Generate proof for Re : πe ← NIZK.Prove(ppe , xe , we ).
                                          m         n
7. Construct transaction: tx := ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?), where ? := (stL , πe ).
                n
8. Output ([rj ]1 , tx).
              L
 DPC.Verify
 Input: public parameters pp and transaction tx
 Output: decision bit b
                      m        n
1. Parse tx as ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?) and ? as (stL , πe ).
2. Check that there are no duplicate serial numbers
    (a) within the transaction tx: sni 6= snj for every distinct i, j ∈ {1, . . . , m};
    (b) on the ledger: L.Contains(sni ) = 0 for every i ∈ {1, . . . , m}.
3. Check that the ledger state is valid: L.ValidateDigest(stL ) = 1.
                                                                   m     n
4. Construct instance for the relation Re : xe := (stL , [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
5. Check proof for the relation Re : NIZK.Verify(ppe , xe , πe ) = 1.

                                              Figure 8: Construction of a DPC scheme.




                                                                   23
                                                                                                                  m
                                                                           old records
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                             [ri ]1
            ledger digest
                                                        
                                                stL                                                                  m 
           old record serial numbers                 m                   old record membership witnesses   [wL,i ]1 
                                                [sni ]1                                                            m
     xe =                                                      and we = 
                                                                          old address secret keys
                                                                         
           new record commitments                     n
                                                                                                            [aski ]1 
                                                [cmj ]1                  new records                            n
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                             [rj ]1
            transaction memorandum
                                                                                                                       
                                                memo
                                                                           auxiliary predicate input         aux

where
• for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, ri = (apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i , ρi , ri , cmi );
• for each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, rj = (apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj , rj , cmj ).
                                          m          m                   m           m m      m             
                                     [cmi ]1 [apki ]1 [payloadi ]1 [Φd,i ]1 [Φb,i ]1 [sni ]1 memo
Define the local data ldata :=             n          n                   n           n n                      .
                                     [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [Φd,j ]1 [Φb,j ]1 aux
Then, a witness we is valid for an instance xe if the following conditions hold:
1. For each i ∈ {i, . . . , m}:
   • If ri is not dummy, wL,i proves that the commitment cmi is in a ledger with digest stL : L.Verify(stL , cmi , wL,i ) = 1.
   • The address public key apki and secret key aski form a valid key pair:
         apki = CM.Commit(ppCM , skPRF,i ; rpk,i ) and aski = (skPRF,i , rpk,i ).
   • The serial number sni is valid: sni = PRFskPRF,i (ρi ).
   • The old record commitment cmi is valid: cmi = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apki kpayloadi kΦb,i kΦd,i kρi ; ri ).
   • The death predicate Φd,i is satisfied by local data: Φd,i (ikldata) = 1.
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
   • The serial number nonce ρj is computed correctly: ρj = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
   • The new record commitment cmj is valid: cmj = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apkj kpayloadj kΦb,j kΦd,j kρj ; rj ).
   • The birth predicate Φb,j is satisfied by local data: Φb,j (jkldata) = 1.


                                                 Figure 9: The execute NP relation Re .




                                                                      24
5     Delegating zero knowledge execution
The cost of creating a transaction in the DPC scheme from Section 4 grows with the complexity (and
number of) predicates involved in the transaction. The user must produce, and include in the transaction, a
cryptographic proof that, among other things, attests that death predicates of consumed records are satisfied
and, similarly, that birth predicates of created records are satisfied. This implies that producing transactions
on weak devices such as mobile phones or hardware tokens quickly becomes infeasible.
    In Sections 5.1 to 5.3 we explain how to address this problem by enabling a user to delegate to an untrusted
worker, such as a remote server, the computation that produces a transaction. This empowers weak devices to
produce transactions that they otherwise could not have produced on their own. Then, in Section 5.4, we
explain how the ideas that we use for delegating transactions also yield solutions for achieving threshold
transactions and blind transactions in a DPC scheme, which are also valuable in applications. Techniques
derived from these ideas are now part of deployed systems [HBHW18].

5.1   Approach
A naive approach is for the user to simply ask the worker to produce the cryptographic proof on its behalf,
and then include this proof in the transaction. The intuition behind this idea is that the user can check that the
proof received from the worker is valid, by simply running the proof verification procedure. Indeed, whenever
the DPC scheme uses a succinct argument (see Remark 4.1), the verification procedure is succinct.
    However, this approach is insecure, because the worker, in order to produce a proof, would have to learn
not only the instance but also the secret witness for the NP statement being proved. Since the secret witness
includes the user’s address secret key, if the worker learns this information then the worker can impersonate
the user, e.g., by producing further transactions that the user never authorized. This naive approach also fails
in prior proof-based ledger protocols, including Zerocash [BCG+ 14]. New ideas are needed.
    Taking our construction of a DPC scheme from Section 4 as a starting point, we explain how to enable a
user to delegate the expensive proof computation to a worker in such a way that the worker cannot produce
valid transactions that have not been authorized by the user; see Fig. 11. (Additional security goals, such as
ensuring that the worker learns no information about the user, are left to future work.)
    The basic idea is to augment address keys in such a way that the secret information needed to produce the
cryptographic proof is separate from the secret information needed to authorize a transaction containing that
proof. Thus, the user can communicate to the worker the secrets necessary to generate a cryptographic proof,
while retaining the remaining secrets for authorizing this (and future) transactions. In particular, the worker
has no way to produce valid transactions that have not been authorized by the user.
    We stress that the simplistic solution in which the user authorizes the proof produced by the worker by
signing it via a secret key not shared with the worker does not work because it violates privacy. Indeed, others
would have to use the same public key to verify signatures across multiple transactions containing signatures
produced by the same secret key, thereby linking these transactions together.
    The next two sub-sections explain how we achieve delegation: first, in Section 5.2, we describe a variant
of randomizable signatures, which we use as a building block; then, in Section 5.3, we provide a high-level
description of a delegable DPC scheme. The detailed construction is provided in Appendix B.

5.2   Additional building block: randomizable signatures
A randomizable signature scheme is a tuple of algorithms SIG = (Setup, Keygen, Sign, Verify, RandPk,
RandSig) that enables a party to sign messages, while also allowing randomization of public keys and


                                                       25
signatures to prevent linking across multiple signatures. We first discuss the syntax of the usual algorithms.
• Setup: on input a security parameter, SIG.Setup samples public parameters ppSIG .
• Key generation: on input public parameters ppSIG , SIG.Keygen samples a key pair (pkSIG , skSIG ).
• Message signing: on input public parameters ppSIG , secret key skSIG , and message m, SIG.Sign produces a
  signature σ.
• Signature verification: on input public parameters ppSIG , public key pkSIG , message m, and signature σ,
  SIG.Verify outputs a bit b denoting whether σ is a valid signature for m under public key pkSIG .
In addition to the usual algorithms, SIG has two algorithms for randomizing public keys and signatures.
                                                                                              ˆ .
• Public key randomization: SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , rSIG ) samples a randomized public key pkSIG
• Signature randomization: SIG.RandSig(ppSIG , σ, rSIG ) samples a randomized signature σ̂.
The signature scheme SIG must satisfy the following security properties.
• Existential unforgeability. Given a public key pkSIG , it is infeasible to produce a forgery under pkSIG or
  under under any randomization of pkSIG . This notion strengthens the standard unforgeability notion, and is
  similar to that of randomizable signatures in [FKM+ 16].
• Unlinkability. Given a public key pkSIG and a tuple (pkˆ , m, σ̂) where σ̂ is a valid signature for m under
                                                           SIG
   ˆ
  pkSIG , no efficient adversary can determine if pkˆ     is a fresh public key and σ̂ a fresh signature, or if
                                                      SIG
           ˆ
  instead pkSIG is a randomization of pkSIG and σ̂ a randomization of a signature for pkSIG . This property is a
  computational relaxation of the perfect unlinkability property of randomizable signatures in [FKM+ 16].
• Injective randomization. Randomization of public keys is (computationally) injective with respect to
  randomness. Informally, given public parameters ppSIG , it is infeasible to find a public key pkSIG and
  r1 6= r2 such that SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , r1 ) = SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , r2 ).

5.3   A delegable DPC scheme
We describe how to construct a delegable DPC scheme, namely, a DPC scheme in which a user can delegate
to an untrusted worker the expensive computations associated with producing a transaction. The security goal
is that the worker should not be able to produce valid transactions that have not been authorized by the user.
Below we assume familiarity with our “plain” DPC construction (see Section 4).
     The user will maintain (among other things) a key pair (pkSIG , skSIG ) for a randomizable signature scheme
SIG (see Section 5.2). The public key pkSIG will be embedded in the user’s public key apk and also be used
to derive the serial numbers of records “owned” by apk. In contrast, the secret key skSIG will not be a part
of any data structures, and will only be used to authorize transactions by signing the cryptographic proofs
produced by untrusted workers.
     In more detail, we first describe how addresses and records are generated (also see summary in Fig. 10).
• Addresses. In Section 4 an address public key apk was a commitment to a secret key skPRF for a
  pseudorandom function PRF. Now apk is a commitment to this same information as well as the public key
  of a key pair (pkSIG , skSIG ) for SIG. The corresponding address secret key ask consists of all the committed
  information and the commitment randomness.
• Records. The structure of a record, including how a record commitment is computed, is as in Section 4.
  However, a record’s serial number sn is now derived in a different way: while previously sn := PRFskPRF (ρ)
  now we set sn := SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , PRFskPRF (ρ)) where ρ is the record’s serial number nonce.
  Namely, while before serial numbers were outputs of a pseudorandom function keyed by skPRF , now they
  are randomizations of the authorization public key pkSIG when using suitable pseudorandomness.

                                                      26
Note that the foregoing new derivation of serial numbers does not break important security properties.

– Unlinkability of serial numbers: serial numbers of different records that share the same authorization
  public pkSIG are computationally indistinguishable. This follows rather directly from the fact sn, being a
  randomization of pkSIG , does not reveal information (to efficient distinguishers) about pkSIG itself.
– No double spending: a user cannot “spend” (i.e., consume) r in two different transactions by revealing
  different serial numbers because rSIG (and thus sn) is generated deterministically from r. Since SIG is
  randomness-injective in SIG.RandPk, sn is (computationally) unique to r.

Having described the modified data structures of addresses and serial numbers, we now explain how a user
can task a worker to produce the cryptographic proofs that need to be included in a transaction. For simplicity,
in this high-level discussion we focus on the case where the transaction involves only one input (old) record
r and one output (new) record r0 . In this case, the transaction contains a serial number sn (supposedly
corresponding to r), and a commitment cm0 (supposedly corresponding to r0 ).
    Previously, the user had to generate a proof πe that sn is consistent with r, that cm0 can be opened to r0 ,
and that the death and birth predicates of r and r0 respectively are satisfied. Now the user can delegate to
a worker the generation of the proof πe because the modified derivation of apk and sn allows the user to
communicate to the worker only r, r0 and a part of the address secret key of r. Namely, the user sends to the
worker only the pseudorandom function key skPRF and the commitment randomness rpk . Crucially, the user
does not have to communicate to the worker the authorization secret key skSIG .
    After receiving the proof πe from the worker, the user uses the authorization secret key skSIG to sign
πe (along with the instance that πe attests to), and then randomizes the resulting signature σ to obtain σ̂.
The final transaction tx not only includes the serial number sn (consuming the old record), the commitment
cm0 (creating the new record), and πe (attesting to the correct state transition) as before, but also includes σ̂.
Transaction verification involves checking the proof πe and also checking that σ̂ is valid with respect to the
randomized public key sn.
    This completes our high-level description of our delegable DPC scheme; see Appendix B for details.

                            Plain DPC                                        Delegable DPC
     Address secret key     (skPRF , rpk )                                 (skSIG , skPRF , rpk )                        
                                                      ppCM ,                                                ppCM ,
     Address public key     apk := CM.Commit                 ;r              apk := CM.Commit                         ;r
                                                      skPRF pk                                            pkSIG kskPRF pk
     Serial number          sn ← PRFskPRF (ρ)                                1. rSIG ← PRFskPRF (ρ)
     derivation                                                              2. sn ← SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , rSIG )
     Transaction                         m        n
                            tx := ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?),             1. Sign transaction contents:
     construction           where ? := (stL , πe ).                              (a) σi ← SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG,i , xe kπe ).
                                                                                 (b) σ̂i ← SIG.RandSig(ppSIG , σi , rSIG,i ).
                                                                                             m         n
                                                                             2. tx := ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?),
                                                                                                             m
                                                                                where ? := (stL , πe , [σ̂i ]1 ).
     Transaction            Check that serial numbers do not appear on       As in plain DPC, but additionally check that each
     verification           ledger, that the ledger state digest is valid,   signature verifies:
                            and that the NIZK proof verifies.                SIG.Verify(ppSIG , tx.sni , xe kπe , σi ) = 1.

                    Figure 10: Summary of differences between plain DPC and delegable DPC (highlighted).




                                                                   27
5.4    Threshold transactions and blind transactions
We explain how the delegable DPC scheme described above can be modified, in a straightforward way, to
achieve additional features: threshold transactions or blind transactions.
Threshold transactions. A DPC scheme has threshold transactions if the power to authorize transactions
can be vested unto any t out of n parties, for any desired choice of t and n (as opposed to a single user as
discussed thus far, which corresponds to the special case of t = n = 1); see Fig. 12. Threshold transactions
are useful in many settings, e.g., to enhance operational security by realizing two-factor authentication.
    We can achieve threshold transactions by simply using, in our delegable DPC scheme, a randomizable
signature scheme SIG that also supports threshold key generation and threshold signing algorithms [DF91].
Such a threshold signature scheme distributes signing ability among n parties such that at least t of them
are needed to authorize a signature. Threshold key generation would then be used to create an address, and
threshold signing would be used to authorize a transaction by signing the corresponding cryptographic proof.
Blind transactions. A DPC scheme has blind transactions if there is a way for a user to authorize a transaction
without learning of its contents; see Fig. 13. Blind transactions, in conjunction with prior techniques [CGL+ 17],
can be used to construct efficient lottery tickets and thereby probabilistic micropayments.
    We can achieve blind transactions by simply using, in our delegable DPC scheme, a randomizable
signature scheme SIG that has a blind signing algorithm, which can then be used for signing the relevant
cryptographic proof in order to authorize a transaction.
Instantiating randomizable threshold and blind signatures. As we explain in Appendix B.1, we construct
randomizable signature schemes by modifying Schnorr signatures. To further construct threshold or blind
randomizable signatures, it is enough to note that public key and signature randomization occurs after the
public key or signature has been created. Thus one can use existing protocols for threshold key-generation
and signing [SS01, NKDM03, Dod07], and blind signing [PS00, SJ99] to obtain public keys and signatures,
and then use the algorithms from Appendix B.1 to randomize these. A nice feature of this approach is that all
these types of delegated transactions (regular, threshold, blind) cannot be distinguished from one another.

                                                                                                   request
                                                                                                  request
                                                                                                     blinded proof
               request
                request request                             request
                                                            requestrequest                        w/ proof
                                                                                                  w/  proof
                proof
                 proof proof txtx          tx                proof
                                                             proof proof        tx    tx     tx         tx auth
                                                                                                       tx

    worker worker
   worker                  user
                          user      user        workerworker
                                                worker                  users users        user user
                                                                                           user                 authorizer
                                                                                                           authorizer
                                                                                                           authorizer
   Figure 11: Delegable transactions.           Figure 12: Threshold transactions.          Figure 13: Blind transactions.




                                                               28
6      Applications
We describe example applications of DPC schemes, by showing how to “program” these within the records
nano-kernel. We draw inspiration from current uses of smart contract systems (e.g., Ethereum), which largely
focus on financial applications where privacy is an important goal. First, in Section 6.1 we describe how
to enable users to privately create and transact with custom assets (expanding on Example 2.1). Second,
in Section 6.2 we describe how to realize private DEXs, which enable users to privately trade assets while
retaining custody of their assets. Finally, in Section 6.3, we describe how a central authority can issue assets
with self-enforcing, and updatable, policies, and use these to realize regulation-friendly private stablecoins.

6.1     User-defined assets
One of the most basic applications of smart contract systems like Ethereum is the construction of assets (or
tokens) that can be used for financial applications. For example, the Ethereum ERC20 specification [VB15]
defines a general framework for such assets. These assets have two phases: asset minting (creation), and asset
conservation (expenditure). We show below how to express such custom assets via the records nano-kernel.
    We consider records whose payloads encode: an asset identifier id, the initial asset supply v, a value v,
and application-dependent data c (we will use this in Sections 6.2 and 6.3). We fix the birth predicate in all
such records to be a mint-or-conserve function MoC that is responsible for asset minting and conservation. In
more detail, the birth predicate MoC can be invoked in two modes, mint mode or conserve mode.
    When invoked in mint mode, MoC creates the initial supply v of the asset in, say, a single output record,
by deterministically deriving a fresh unique identifier id for the asset (see below for how), and storing the
tuple (id, v, v, ⊥) in the record’s payload. The predicate MoC also ensures that in the given transaction there
are no input records or other output records (dummy records are allowed). If MoC is invoked in mint mode in
other transactions, a different identifier id is created, ensuring that multiple assets can be distinguished even
though anyone can use MoC as the birth predicate of a record.
    When invoked in conserve mode, MoC inspects all records in a transaction whose birth predicates all
equal MoC (i.e., all the transaction’s user-defined assets) and whose asset identifiers all equal to the identifier
of the current record. For these records it ensures that the no new value is created: that is, the sum of the
value across all output records is less than or equal to the sum of the value in all input records.
    Below we provide pseudocode for MoC, making the informal discussion above more precise.

    Mint-or-conserve predicate MoC(k, ldata; mode)            (mode is the private input of the predicate)
                             in 2          in 2            in 2        in 2           in 2         in 2                 
                           [cmi ]1     [apki ]1     [payloadi ]1      [Φd,i ]1 [Φb,i ]1 [sni ]1 memo
    1. Parse ldata as         out 2         out 2           out 2       out 2          out 2                               .
                           [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [Φd,j ]1 [Φb,j ]1                                   aux
    2. If mode = (mint, v, r), ensure that the first output record contains the initial supply of the asset:
        (a) the index of the current output record is correct: k = 1.
                                                      in                           in                               out
        (b) all other records are dummy: payload1 .isDummy = payload2 .isDummy = payload2 .isDummy = 1.
        (c) the asset identifier is derived correctly: id = CM.Commit(ppCM , sn1 k sn2 ; r). (See explanation below.)
                                                                         out                                        out
        (d) the current output record’s payload is correct: payload1 .isDummy = 0 and payload1 = (id, v, v, ⊥).
    3. If mode = conserve, check that the value of the current asset is conserved:
                                                                   out        ?     ?    ? ?
        (a) parse the current output record’s payload payloadk as (id , v , v , c ).
                                                                                in         in   in    in in
        (b) for i ∈ {1, 2}, parse the i-th input record’s payload payloadi as (idi , vi , vi , ci ).
                                                                                   out        out     out    out out
        (c) for j ∈ {1, 2}, parse the i-th output record’s payload payloadj as (idj , vj , vj , cj ).
                        in            out                                                ?
        (d) initialize v := 0 and v := 0, representing the value of asset id consumed and created (respectively).
                                 in       ?     in    ?          in                            in         in      in         in     ?
        (e) for i ∈ {1, 2}, if Φb,i = Φb , idi = id , payloadi .isDummy = 0, set v := v + vi and check that vi = v .
                                 out      ?     out     ?          out                             out        out       out     out   ?
        (f) for j ∈ {1, 2}, if Φb,j = Φb , idj = id , payloadj .isDummy = 0, set v := v + vj and check that vj = v .
                                               ?                in      out
        (g) check that the value of asset id is conserved: v = v .



                                                                   29
    Most of the lines above are self-explanatory, but for the line that derives a fresh unique identifier in the
“mint” case (Step 2c), which deserves an explanation. Informally, the idea is to derive the identifier from the
(globally unique) serial numbers of records consumed in the minting transaction. In more detail, we set the
identifier to be a commitment to the serial numbers of consumed input records. To see why this works, first
note that the commitment scheme’s binding property guarantees that opening a commitment to two different
messages is computationally difficult. Next, note that in our case these messages are the input records’ serial
numbers, and hence are different. Together, these facts imply that the identifier is globally unique (and hence
non-repeating). A benefit of this method is that the commitment scheme’s hiding property further guarantees
that the identifier reveals no information about the underlying serial numbers, which in turn guarantees that
the identifier hides all information about the initial minting transaction (given that r is random).

6.2    Decentralized exchanges
We describe how to use death predicates that enforce custom-access policies to build privacy-preserving
decentralized exchanges. These allow users to exchange custom assets with strong privacy guarantees without
requiring users to give up custody of these assets. We proceed by first providing background on centralized
and decentralized exchanges. Then, we formulate desirable privacy properties for decentralized exchanges.
Finally, we describe constructions that achieve these properties.
Motivation. Exchanging digital assets is a compelling use case of ledger-based systems. A straightforward
method to exchange digital assets is via a centralized exchange: users entrust the exchange with custody of
their assets via an on-chain transaction, and the exchange can then credit or debit assets to users’ accounts
according to off-chain trades without any on-chain activity; users can “exit” by requesting to withdraw
assets, which generates another on-chain transaction that transfers those assets from the exchange to the user.
Examples of such exchanges include Coinbase [coi] and Binance [bin]. This architecture provides centralized
exchanges with two attractive properties: (a) efficiency, namely, all trades occur in the exchange’s off-chain
database, resulting in low latency and high throughput for all users; and (b) privacy, namely, only the exchange
knows the details of individual trades, and only asset deposits and withdrawals require on-chain activity; this
activity can further be concealed by using private (Zerocash-style) transactions to realize deposits/withdrawals.
However, this centralized architecture has a serious drawback: having given up custody of their assets, users
are exposed to the risk of security breaches, fraud, or front-running at the exchange. These risks are not
hypothetical: users have lost funds deposited at centralized exchanges [PA14, De18, Zha18, Cim18].
    In light of the above, decentralized exchanges (DEXs) have been proposed as an alternative method
for exchanging digital assets that enable users to retain custody of their assets. However, existing DEX
constructions have poor efficiency and privacy guarantees. Below we describe how we can provide strong
privacy for DEXs. (We leave improving the efficiency of DEXs to future work.)
DEX architectures. A DEX is a ledger-based application that enables users to trade digital assets without
giving up custody of these assets to a third party. There are different DEX architectures with different
trade-offs; see [Pro18] for a survey. In the following, we consider DEX architectures where the exchange has
no state or maintains its state off-chain.8 There are two main categories of such DEXs:

• Intent-based DEX. The DEX maintains an index, which is a table where makers publish their intention to
  trade (say, a particular asset pair) without committing any assets. A taker interested in a maker’s intention
  to trade can directly communicate with the maker to agree on terms. They can jointly produce a transaction
  for the trade, to be broadcast for on-chain processing. An example of such a DEX is AirSwap [air].
   8This is in contrast to DEX architectures that involve, say, a smart contract that stores on-chain the standing orders of all users.



                                                                 30
  An attractive feature of intent-based DEXs is that they reduce exposure to front-running because the
  information required for front-running (like prices or identities of the involved parties) has been finalized by
  the time the transaction representing the trade is broadcast for processing. Note that the aforementioned
  lack of information also makes it difficult for the market to discover appropriate exchange rates because
  listings in the index cannot directly be linked with completed transactions.
• Order-based DEX. The DEX maintains an order book, which is a table where makers can publish orders by
  committing the funds for those orders up front. A taker can then interact with the order book to fill orders.
  In an open-book DEX, the taker manually picks an order from the order book, while in a closed-book DEX,
  the taker is matched off-chain with a maker’s offer by the order book operator. An example of an open-book
  DEX is Radar Relay [rad], and an example of a closed-book DEX is Paradex [par].
  Note that order books (which are typically public) give more information about market activity than indexes,
  and hence enable better price discovery. However, existing constructions of order-based DEXs also allow
  other parties to link a standing order with a transaction that fills the order before the transaction is finalized,
  enabling them to front-run the order. Which parties can front-run depends on the kind of order-based
  DEX: in the open-book variant, anyone can front-run, while in the closed-book variant, only the order book
  operator can front-run (as it is the sole entity that can invoke the trade smart-contract).
The architectures described above offer different trade-offs with respect to market price discovery and
front-running exposure, and hence can be useful in different scenarios.
Privacy shortcomings and goals. While the foregoing DEX architectures offer attractive security and
functionality, they do not provide strong privacy guarantees, as we now explain. First, each transaction reveals
information about the corresponding trade, such as the assets and amounts that were exchanged. Prior work
[BDJT17, BBD+ 17] shows that such leakage enables front-running that harms user experience and market
transparency, and proposes mitigations that, while potentially useful, do not provide strong privacy guarantees.
Even if one manages to hide these trade details, transactions in existing DEXs also reveal the identities of
transacting parties. Onlookers can use this information to extract trading patterns and frequencies of users.
This reduces the privacy of users, violates the fungibility of assets, and increases exposure to front-running,
because onlookers can use the aforementioned patterns to infer when particular assets are being traded.
    These shortcomings motivate the following privacy goals for DEXs. Throughout, we assume that an
order is defined by a pair of assets (that are to be exchanged), and their exchange rates.
1. Trade confidentiality: No efficient adversary A should be able to learn the trade details of completed or
   cancelled trades. That is, a transaction that completes or cancels a trade should not reveal to A the asset
   pairs or amounts involved in the trade.
2. Trade anonymity: No efficient adversary A should be able to learn the identities of parties involved in a
   trade. That is, a transaction that completes or cancels a trade should not reveal to A any information about
   the maker or taker of the trade.
A protocol that achieves trade confidentiality and trade anonymity against an adversary A is secure against
front-running by A. The flip-side of this is that A cannot easily discover the rates used in successful trades,
leading to poorer visibility into the trading market. We now describe constructions of intent-based and
order-based DEXs that achieve trade confidentiality and anonymity.9
Record format. Recall from Section 6.1 that records representing units of an asset have payloads of the form
(id, v, v, c), where id is the asset identifier, v is the initial asset supply, v is the asset amount, and c is arbitrary
   9Throughout, we assume that users interact with index or-order book operators via anonymous channels. (If this is not the case,
operators can use network information to link users across different interactions regardless of any cryptographic solutions used.).


                                                               31
auxiliary information. In the following, we make use of records that, in addition to the mint-or-conserve birth
predicate MoC, have an exchange-or-cancel death predicate EoC described next. Informally, EoC allows a
record r to be consumed either by exchanging it for v ? units of an asset with birth predicate Φ?b and identifier
id? (id? , Φ?b and v ? are specified in c), or by “cancelling” the exchange and instead sending new records with
r’s asset identifier to an address apk? (also specified in c). The information required for the exchange includes
the asset’s birth predicate in addition to its identifier, as it enables users to interact with assets that have birth
predicate different from MoC (such as the stablecoins in Section 6.3). The predicate is described below.

  Exchange-or-cancel predicate EoC(k, ldata; mode)                (mode is the private input for the predicate.)
                             in 2        in 2              in 2           in 2           in 2         in 2          
                           [cmi ]1   [apki ]1    [payloadi ]1           [Φd,i ]1 [Φb,i ]1 [sni ]1 memo
  1. Parse ldata as           out 2       out 2             out 2          out 2          out 2                          .
                           [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [Φd,j ]1 [Φb,j ]1                                      aux
  2. Recall that k ∈ {1, 2} is the index of the current input record. Let l ∈ {1, 2} denote the index of the other input record.
     (If k = 1 then set l := 2; if instead k = 2 then set l := 1.)
                                                         in          in          in in                                  in      ?     ?   ?     ?
  3. Parse the current input record’s payload payloadk as (idk , vk , vk , ck ), and the application data ck as (Φb,k , idk , vk , apkk ).
                                                       in          in          in in                                   in      ?    ?   ?     ?
  4. Parse the other input record’s payload payloadl as (idl , vl , vl , cl ), and the application data cl as (Φb,l , idl , vl , apkl ).
  5. If mode = exch, ensure that the assets are correctly exchanged, by checking the following.
                                                        in                                   in
      (a) the input records are not dummy: payload1 .isDummy = payload2 .isDummy = 0.
      (b) the conditions of the trade are satisfied:
                                                                                                               in    ?      in    ?        in     ?
           i. the current input record has the expected identifier, birth predicate, and value: Φb,k = Φb,l , idk = idl , and vk = vl .
                                                                                                              in    ?      in     ?        in    ?
          ii. the other input record has the expected identifier, birth predicate, and value: Φb,l = Φb,k , idl = idk , and vl = vk .
                                                                                        in         out         in    out
         iii. the output records’ birth predicates are correctly swapped: Φb,1 = Φb,2 and Φb,2 = Φb,1 .
         iv. the output records have the correct asset identifier, initial supply, and value:
                       out       in     in                    out           in         in
              payload1 = (id2 , v2 , v2 , ⊥) and payload2 = (id1 , v1 , v1 , ⊥).
                                                                    out            ?            out         ?
          v. the output records are addressed correctly: apkk = apkk and apkl = apkl .
  6. Else if mode = cancel, ensure that the trade is cancelled by checking that the idk -value is transferred to the specified
                                               ?
     “redemption” address public key apkk , by checking the following.
      (a) the current input record is non-dummy: payloadk .isDummy = 0.
      (b) the other input record is dummy: payloadl .isDummy = 1.
                                                                         in
      (c) the output records are custom assets with identifier idk :
                                                                             out         out        in
           i. the output records have the correct birth predicate: Φb,1 = Φb,2 = Φb,k .
          ii. the output records have the correct asset identifier and initial supply:
                       out       in     out                    out            in          out
              payload1 = (idk , vk , v1 , ⊥) and payload2 = (idk , vk , v2 , ⊥).
                                            in        out       out         in
      (d) the output records preserve idk -value: v1 + v2 = vk .
                                                                                   out          out         ?
      (e) the address public key of the output records is correct: apk1 = apk2 = apkk .


The case of intent-based DEXs. We describe an intent-based DEX that hides all information information
about orders and transacting parties.

1. A maker M can publish to the index an intention to trade, which is a tuple (idA , idB , pkM ) to be interpreted
   as: “I want to buy assets with identifier idB in exchange for assets with identifier idA . Please contact me
   using the encryption public key pkM if you would like to discuss the terms.”
2. A taker T who is interested in this offer can use pkM to privately communicate with M and agree on the
   terms of the trade (the form of communication is irrelevant). If T and M do not reach an agreement, then
   T can always pursue other entries in the index. So suppose that T and M do reach an agreement. For the
   sake of example, T will give 10 units of asset idB to M and will receive 5 units of asset idA from M.
3. The taker T creates a new record r with payload (idB , vB , 10, c) for auxiliary data c = (idA , 5, apknew ),
   and with death predicate EoC. Then T sends r (along with the information necessary to redeem r) to M.
4. If M possesses a record worth 5 units of asset idA , he can use T’s message to construct a DPC transaction
   that completes the exchange by consuming r and by producing appropriate new records for M and T. (This
   step deviates from existing intent-based DEXs in that it is the maker that broadcasts the trade transaction.)


                                                                        32
The record r produced by the taker T can be redeemed by M only via an appropriate record in exchange. If M
does not possess such a record, T can cancel the trade (at any time) and retrieve his funds by satisfying the
“cancel” branch of the predicate EoC (which requires knowing the secret key corresponding to apknew ).
    Note that regardless of whether the trade was successful or not, this protocol achieves trade anonymity and
trade confidentiality against all parties (including the index operator). Indeed, the only information revealed
in the final transaction is that some records were consumed and others created; no information is revealed
about M, T, the assets involved in the trade (idA and idB ), or the amounts exchanged.
The case of order-based DEXs. We describe private order-based DEXs, with open or closed books.
• Open-book DEX: The variant below hides all information about M and T, but reveals the assets and amounts
  involved. This implies achieving trade anonymity but not trade confidentiality.
  For the sake of example, assume again that the maker M will trade 5 units of asset idA for 10 units of asset
  idB . M constructs a record r with payload (idB , vB , v = 10, c = (idA , 5, apk)) and death predicate EoC.
  He uses this to construct an order o = (r, info) consisting of the record and the information necessary to
  consume it, and publishes o to the order book. An interested taker T can then construct and publish a
  transaction tx that consumes r and creates new records with the appropriate values and asset identifiers.
  The transaction tx hides information about the maker M and taker T, but because it reveals r’s serial number,
  it can be linked with its originating order o. This allows onlookers to learn the assets and amounts of tx.
  Hence, this protocol achieves trade anonymity, but not trade confidentiality.
• Closed-book DEX: The variant below hides all order information from everyone but the order book operator.
  Hence it achieves trade anonymity and confidentiality against everyone but the order book operator.
  The maker M creates a record r as above, and sends the record and its consumption information info to the
  order book. The order book does not publish these; it publishes only the terms of the order. Takers can
  publish orders of their own, and if two orders match then the order book operator constructs a transaction tx
  that consumes both records and produces new records, completing the order. At no point does either party
  surrender custody of their funds, thus preserving the self-custodial nature of the exchange protocol.
  The foregoing achieves trade anonymity and confidentiality against everyone but the order book operator
  because only the order book operator learns the details of the records consumed by the transaction tx, and
  tx itself (which once published anyone can see) does not reveal any information about these records. As a
  consequence, this protocol also protects against front-running by everyone but the order book.
  Note that in our protocol, the maker acts as the taker’s counterparty (and vice versa), while in non-private
  closed-book DEXs, only the order book operator can act as the counterparty for both the maker and the
  taker. Our protocol can be modified to support such a flow by straightforward modifications to EoC.
Operator fees. In the foregoing we have omitted a discussion of fees due to the operators of DEX infrastructure
(such as index or order book operators). Support for such fees can be achieved, in a straightforward way, by
the following small modifications to the exchange-or-cancel predicate EoC. First, one would need to increase
the number of output records of DPC transactions to n = 3; the third record would be used to pay fees to
the operator. Second, one would have to decide how these fees are calculated. This can be done, e.g., by
hardcoding a fee percentage into the predicate or by allowing users to specify fees that they are willing to pay.

6.3   Stablecoins and centrally-managed assets
Recently there has been growing interest in custom assets that are managed by a central authority. These
include stablecoins, which are assets whose value relative to an another is fixed (see [Har18] for an overview).

                                                       33
Centrally-managed assets are more compatible with regulations like taxes or blacklists, because the central
authority can enforce monetary policies that follow these regulations. Indeed, existing stablecoins like the
Gemini dollar [gem] and the Paxos standard [pax] have mechanisms for reversing transactions or freezing
funds in response to legal rulings. In this section, we show how to construct private centrally-managed assets
that support arbitrary, and updatable, policies issued by the central authority; this in particular shows how to
create and manage policies for private stablecoins. We stress that the ideas described below are compatible
with applications that reason about other custom assets. For example, one can use DEXs from Section 6.2 to
exchange units of a private stablecoin with units of any other user-defined asset (like one from Section 6.1).
    We enforce policies by extending the mint-or-conserve predicate MoC from Section 6.1 into a mint-
or-enforce predicate MoEΠ whose “enforce” mode enforces a desired policy Π. In more detail, say that a
central authority A wishes to issue an asset satisfying policy Π (initially). To do so, A generates a signature
public key pkA , and then invokes MoEΠ in mint mode. In this mode, MoEΠ , like MoC, generates the asset
identifier id and creates the initial supply v of the asset in a single output record whose payload stores the
tuple (id, v, v, ⊥). Unlike MoC, MoEΠ binds id not only to the serial numbers of input records (to achieve
uniqueness), but also to the public key pkA that authorized Π. This means that, when receiving payments in
such assets, the recipient can immediately deduce the asset’s identifier and (authorized) policy.
    In a transaction with multiple records, policies are applied and updated by the enforce mode of MoEΠ . In
this mode, MoEΠ ensures that the new record’s payload stores (id, v, v, c), and that the policy Π is satisfied.
To update a record r having policy Π to a record r0 having policy Π0 , one can create a transaction that
consumes r and creates r0 such that r0 has birth predicate MoEΠ0 . To ensure that this update is authorized by
A, MoEΠ0 checks that a signature over Π0 with respect to pkA has been provided, and that id has been correctly
derived from pkA . These checks ensure that every record with identifier id only has authorized policies.
    Below we provide pseudocode for MoEΠ .

  Mint-or-enforce predicate MoEΠ (k, ldata; mode)           (mode is the private input of the predicate)
                           in 2         in 2            in 2       in 2       in 2     in 2             
                        [cmi ]1      [apki ]1   [payloadi ]1      [Φd,i ]1 [Φb,i ]1 [sni ]1 memo
  1. Parse ldata as         out 2        out 2           out 2      out 2      out 2                       .
                        [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [Φd,j ]1 [Φb,j ]1                        aux
  2. If mode = (mint, v, r, pkSIG , σΠ ), ensure that the first output record contains the initial supply of the asset:
      (a) the index of the current output record is correct: k = 1.
                                                   in                       in                       out
      (b) all other records are dummy: payload1 .isDummy = payload2 .isDummy = payload2 .isDummy = 1.
      (c) the asset identifier is derived correctly: id = CRH(ppCRH , CM.Commit(ppCM , sn1 k sn2 ; r)kpkSIG ).
      (d) the policy Π is authorized by pkSIG : SIG.Verify(ppSIG , pkSIG , Π, σΠ ) = 1.
                                                                     out                             out
      (e) the current output record’s payload is correct: payload1 .isDummy = 0 and payload1 = (id, v, v, c = ⊥).
  3. If mode = (enforce, ρ, pkSIG , σΠ ), check that the policy Π is enforced:
                                                               out        ?  ?   ?
      (a) parse the current output record’s payload payloadk as (id , v , v , c).
                                                      ?
      (b) check that pkSIG is valid for the asset: id = CRH(ppCRH , ρkpkSIG ).
      (c) check that the policy Π is authorized under pk: SIG.Verify(ppSIG , pkSIG , Π, σΠ ) = 1.
      (d) check that the policy Π is satisfied: Π(k, ldata) = 1.

    By way of example, we now show how a central authority A can use the mint-or-enforce predicate to
construct a stablecoin that enforces a blacklisting (in addition to the default value-conservation policy).
Namely, if an address is on a blacklist B of addresses, the address is not allowed to participate in transactions.
To do so, A follows the above procedure to construct and publish a mint-or-enforce predicate MoEΠB
implementing a policy ΠB that inspects the address public keys of consumed records, and ensures that none
of them are in B. Now suppose that later on A wishes to update B into a new blacklist B 0 that includes a new
address apk. It does so by publishing a corresponding updated predicate MoEΠ 0 for this new blacklist, and
                                                                                  B
users can use the above update mechanism to move their records from policy ΠB to policy ΠB 0 . Now, any
funds stored at the newly-blacklisted address apk cannot be moved to the new policy.


                                                              34
7     Implementation strategy
The straightforward approach to implement our construction of a DPC scheme (described in Section 4) is
to instantiate the proof system via a simulation-extractable zkSNARK (e.g., [GM17]) and then select the
other cryptographic building blocks so that the circuit (more precisely, constraint system) for deciding the NP
relation Re has as small a size as possible. While the straightforward approach sounds promising, closer
inspection reveals significant costs that we need to somehow reduce. In this section we discuss, in a “problem
and solution” format, the challenges that we encountered and how we addressed them. (The implementation
strategy for plain DPC schemes directly ports over to delegable DPC schemes so we do not discuss them.)
Problem 1: universality is expensive. The NP relation Re involves checking arbitrary predicates, which
means that one must rely on proof systems for universal computations. However, checking universal
computations via state-of-the-art zkSNARKs involves expensive tools for universal circuits/machines
[BCG+ 13, BCTV14, WSR+ 15, BCTV17]. These tools would not only yield an expensive solution but would
also penalize users who only produce transactions that attest to simple inexpensive predicates, because these
users would have to incur the costs of using these “heavy duty” proof systems.
Solution 1: recursive proof verification. We address this problem by relying on one layer of recursive
proof composition [Val08, BCCT13]. Instead of tasking Re with checking satisfiability of general predicates,
we only task it with checking succinct proofs attesting to this. Checking succinct proofs is a (relatively)
inexpensive computation that is universal for all predicates, which can be “hardcoded” in Re . Crucially,
since the “outer” succinct proofs produced for Re do not reveal information about the “inner” succinct proofs
attesting to predicates’ satisfiability (thanks to zero knowledge), the inner succinct proofs do not have to hide
what predicate was checked, removing the need for expensive universal circuits; in fact, inner proofs do not
even have to be zero knowledge. Rather, these inner succinct proofs can be for NP relations tailored to the
computations needed by particular birth and death predicates. Furthermore, this approach ensures that a
user only has to incur the cost of proving satisfiability of the specific predicates involved in his transactions,
regardless of the complexity of predicates used by other users in their transactions.
     In more detail, taking the case of one input and one output record as an example, we modify DPC.Execute
to additionally take as input SNARK proofs πd and πb , and also modify the NP relation Re so that, instead of
directly checking that Φd and Φb are satisfied, it instead checks that πd and πb attest to the satisfaction of Φd
and Φb . That is, Re checks that NIZK.Verify(ppΦd , xe , πd ) = 1 and NIZK.Verify(ppΦb , xe , πb ) = 1, where
ppΦd are public parameters for the NP relation RΦd := {(xe , we ) s.t. Φd (xe , we ) = 1} and similarly for Φb .
The public parameters ppΦd and ppΦb are stored in the record, in place of (a description of) the predicates.10
     More generally, we modify DPC.Execute to additionally take as input SNARK proofs [πd,i ]m         1 attesting
                                                                                 n
that the old records’ death predicates are satisfied and SNARK proofs [πb,j ]1 attesting that the new records’
birth predicates are satisfied. Moreover, we similarly modify the NP relation Re to check that these proofs are
valid, instead of directly checking that the relevant predicates are satisfied.
     In sum, Re is not tasked with checking general predicates. Instead, it merely has to check SNARK proofs,
a fixed computation of size Oλ (m + n). Separately, a user wishing to prove that a predicate Φ is satisfied will
invoke a SNARK on an NP statement of size |Φ| (tailored for Φ).11 The approach described so far, however,
hides additional costs that we need to overcome.
   10More precisely, to verify a proof for a predicate Φ, the proof verifier does not need to read all of ppΦ , which has size Oλ (|Φ|) in
some zkSNARKs (i.e., it is large). Rather, the proof verifier only needs to read Oλ (|xe |) bits of ppΦ , which are collectively known as
the verification key. The record would then store this verification key (or a hash thereof) rather than ppΦ .
   11An additional benefit of each predicate Φ having its own public parameters ppΦ is flexible trust: users are not obliged to trust
parameters used in each others’ transactions and, moreover, if some parameters are known to be compromised, predicates can safely
refuse to interact with records associated with them. We view this isolation mechanism as a novel and valuable feature in practice.


                                                                   35
Problem 2: recursion is expensive. Recursive proof composition has so far been empirically demonstrated
for pairing-based SNARKs [BCTV17], whose proofs are extremely short and cheap to verify. We thus focus
our attention on these, and explain the efficiency challenges that we must overcome in our setting.
    Recall that pairings are instantiated via elliptic curves of small embedding degree. If we instantiate a
SNARK’s pairing via an elliptic curve E defined over a prime field Fq and having a subgroup of large prime
order r, then (a) the SNARK supports NP relations R expressed as arithmetic circuits over Fr , while (b) proof
verification involves arithmetic operations over Fq . This means that we need to express Re via arithmetic
circuits over Fr . In turn, since the SNARK verifier is part of Re , this means that we need to also express the
verifier via an arithmetic circuit over Fr , which is problematic because the verifier’s “native” operations are
over Fq . Simulating Fq operations via Fr operations introduces significant overheads, and picking E such
that q = r, in order to avoid simulation, is impossible [BCTV17].
    Prior work thus suggests using multiple curves [BCTV17], such as a two-cycle of pairing-friendly elliptic
curves, that is, two prime-order curves E1 and E2 such that the prime size of one’s base field is the prime
order of the other’s group, and orchestrating SNARKs based on these so that fields always “match up”.
Unfortunately, known curves with these properties are inefficient at 128 bits of security [BCTV17, CCW18].
Solution 2: tailored set of curves. In our setting we merely need “a proof of a proof”, with the latter proof
not itself depending on further proofs.
     This implies that we do not actually need a cycle of pairing-friendly elliptic curves (which enables
recursion of arbitrary depth), but rather only a “two-chain” of two curves E1 and E2 such that the size of the
base field of E1 is the size of the prime order subgroup of E2 . We can use the Cocks–Pinch method [FST10]
to set up such a bounded recursion [BCTV17]. We now elaborate on this.
     First we pick a pairing-friendly elliptic curve E1 that not only is suitable for 128 bits of security according
to standard considerations (involving, e.g., its embedding degree and the ratio of the sizes of its base field
and prime order group) but, moreover, is compatible with efficient SNARK provers in both levels of the
recursion. Namely, letting p be the prime order of the base field and r the prime order of the group, we
need that both Fr and Fp have multiplicative subgroups whose orders are large powers of 2. The condition
on Fr ensures efficient proving for SNARKs over E1 , while the condition on Fp ensures efficient proving
for SNARKs that verify proofs over E1 . In light of the above, we set E1 to be EBLS , a curve from the
Barreto–Lynn–Scott (BLS) family [BLS02, CLN11] with embedding degree 12. This family not only enables
parameters that conservatively achieve 128 bits of security, but also enjoys properties that facilitate very
efficient implementation [AFK+ 12]. We ensure that both Fr and Fp have multiplicative subgroups of order
2α for α ≥ 40, by choosing the parameter x of the BLS family to satisfy x ≡ 1 mod 3 · 2α ; indeed, for such a
choice of x both r(x) = x4 − x2 + 1 and p(x) = (x − 1)2 r(x)/3 + x are divisible by 2α . This also ensures
that x ≡ 1 mod 3, which ensures that there are efficient towering options for the relevant fields [Cos12].
     Next we use the Cocks–Pinch method to pick a pairing-friendly elliptic curve E2 = ECP over a field Fq
such that the curve group ECP (Fq ) contains a subgroup of prime order p (the size of EBLS ’s base field). Since
the method outputs a prime q that has about 2× more bits than the desired p, and in turn p has about 1.5×
more bits than r (due to properties of the BLS family), we only need ECP to have embedding degree 6 in
order to achieve 128 bits of security (as determined from the guidelines in [FST10]).
     In sum, proofs of predicates’ satisfiability are produced via a SNARK over EBLS , and proofs for the NP
relation Re are produced via a zkSNARK over ECP . The matching fields between the two curves ensure that
the former proofs can be efficiently verified.
Problem 3: Cocks–Pinch curves are costly. While the curve ECP was chosen to facilitate efficient checking
of proofs over EBLS , the curve ECP is at least 2× more expensive (in time and space) than EBLS simply
because ECP ’s base field has about twice as many bits as EBLS ’s base field. Checks in the NP relation Re

                                                        36
that are not directly related to proof checking are now unnecessarily carried over a less efficient curve.
Solution 3: split relations across two curves. We split Re into two NP relations RBLS and RCP (see
Fig. 14), with the latter containing just the proof check and the former containing all other checks. We can
then use a zkSNARK over the curve EBLS (an efficient curve) to produce proofs for RBLS , and a zkSNARK
over ECP (the less efficient curve) to produce proofs for RCP . This approach significantly reduces the running
time of DPC.Execute (producing proofs for the checks in RBLS is more efficient over EBLS than over ECP ),
at the expense of a modest increase in transaction size (a transaction now includes a zkSNARK proof over
EBLS in addition to a proof over ECP ). An important technicality that must be addressed is that the foregoing
split relies on certain secret information to be shared across the NP relations, namely, the identities of relevant
predicates and the local data. We can store this information in suitable commitments that are part of the NP
instances for the two NP relations (doing this efficiently requires some care as we discuss below).
Problem 4: the NP relations have many checks. Even using ECP only for SNARK verification and EBLS
for all other checks does not suffice: the NP relations RBLS and RCP still have to perform expensive checks
like verifying Merkle tree authentication paths and commitment openings, and evaluating pseudorandom
functions and collision resistant functions. Similar NP relations, like the one in Zerocash [BCG+ 14], require
upwards of four million gates to express such checks, resulting in high latencies for producing transactions
(several minutes) and large public parameters for the system (hundreds of megabytes).
Solution 4: efficient EC primitives. Commitments and collision-resistant hashing can be expressed as very
efficient arithmetic circuits if one opts for Pedersen-type constructions over suitable Edwards elliptic curves
(and techniques derived from these ideas are now part of deployed systems [HBHW18]). To do this, we pick
two Edwards curves, EEd/BLS over the field Fr (matching the group order of EBLS ) and EEd/CP over the field
Fp (matching the group order of ECP ). This enables us to achieve very efficient circuits for primitives used in
our NP relations, including commitments, collision-resistant hashing, and randomizable signatures. (Note that
EEd/BLS and EEd/CP do not need to be pairing-friendly as the primitives only rely on their group structure.)
Problem 5: sharing information between NP relations is costly. We have said that splitting Re into two
NP relations RBLS and RCP relies on sharing secret information via commitments across NP statements;
namely, a commitment cmΦ to the identities of predicates and a commitment cmldata to the local data. But if
both relations open these commitments, we cannot make an efficient use of Pedersen commitments because
the two NP relations are over different fields: RBLS is over Fr , while RCP is over Fp . For example, if we
used a Pedersen commitment over the order-r subgroup of the Edwards curve EEd/BLS , then: (a) opening
a commitment in RBLS would be cheap, but (b) opening a commitment in RCP would involve expensive
simulation of Fr -arithmetic via Fp -arithmetic. (And similarly if we used a Pedersen commitment over the
order-p subgroup of the Edwards curve EEd/CP .) To make matters worse, the predicate identities and the local
data are large, so an inefficient solution for committing to these would add significant costs to RBLS and RCP .
Solution 5: hash predicate verification keys and commit to local data. In a record, instead of storing
predicate verification keys, we store collision-resistant hashes of these. This reduces the cost of producing the
commitment cmΦ in RBLS and RCP , as cmΦ contains hashes that are much smaller than verification keys.
We realize cmΦ via Blake2s, a boolean primitive of modest cost in Fr and Fp . Crucially, only RCP needs to
access the verification keys themselves, so we can efficiently use a Pedersen hash over the Edwards curve
EEd/CP to let RCP check the keys (supplied as non-deterministic advice) against the hashes inside cmΦ .
    We realize the local data commitment cmldata via a Pedersen commitment over EEd/BLS , and assume that
predicates take cmldata as input rather than local data in the clear. Since both RBLS and the predicate relations
are defined over the field Fr (the prime-order subgroup of the curve EBLS ), non-deterministically opening
cmldata is efficient in both relations. This approach significantly reduces costs because RCP no longer needs


                                                       37
to reason about the contents of cmldata , and can simply pass cmldata as input to the SNARK verifier.




                                                     38
The NP relation RBLS has instances xBLS and witnesses wBLS of the form
                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                       old records
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                [ri ]1
             ledger digest
                                               
                                        stL                                                                                             m
                                            m
          old record serial numbers [sni ]1 
                                                                     old record membership witnesses                           [wL,i ]1 
                                                                     old address secret keys
                                                                                                                                      m 
          new record commitments [cmj ]n
                                                                                                                              [aski ]1 
                                                 and wBLS =  new records                                                           n
 xBLS =                                      1
                                                                                                                                        
          predicate commitment                                                                                                 [rj ]1    
                                        cmΦ     
                                                                     predicate comm. randomness
                                                                                                                                         
          local data commitment
                                                                                                                              rΦ        
                                        cmldata                     local data randomness
                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                rldata
             transaction memorandum memo
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                       auxiliary predicate input                                aux

where
• for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, ri = (apki , payloadi , hb,i , hd,i , ρi , ri , cmi );
• for each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, rj = (apkj , payloadj , hb,j , hd,j , ρj , rj , cmj ).
                                          m          m                    m          m           m         m           
                                     [cmi ]1 [apki ]1 [payloadi ]1 [hd,i ]1                 [hb,i ]1   [sni ]1   memo
Define the local data ldata :=             n          n                    n          n            n                        .
                                     [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [hd,j ]1                 [hb,j ]1   aux
A witness wBLS is valid for an instance xBLS if the following conditions hold:
1. For each i ∈ {i, . . . , m}:
   • If ri is not dummy, wL,i proves that the commitment cmi is in a ledger with digest stL : L.Verify(stL , cmi , wL,i ) = 1.
   • The address public key apki and secret key aski form a valid key pair:
         apki = CM.Commit(ppCM , skPRF,i ; rpk,i ) and aski = (skPRF,i , rpk,i ).
   • The serial number sni is valid: sni = PRFskPRF,i (ρi ).
   • The old record commitment cmi is valid: cmi = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apki kpayloadi khb,i khd,i kρi ; ri ).
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
   • The serial number nonce ρj is computed correctly: ρj = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
   • The new record commitment cmj is valid: cmj = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apkj kpayloadj khb,j khd,j kρj ; rj ).
                                                                         m              n
3. The predicate commitment cmΦ is valid: cmΦ = b2s([hd,i ]1 k [hb,j ]1 k rΦ ).
4. The local data commitment cmldata is valid: cmldata = CM.Commit(ppCM , ldata; rldata )

The NP relation RCP has instances xCP and witnesses wCP of the form
                                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                old death pred. ver. keys
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    [vkd,i ]1
                                                                               old death pred. proofs                     m
                                                                                                                    [πd,i ]1
                    predicate commitment
                                                                                                                                   
                                                  cmΦ                                                                        n
        xCP =                                                    and    wCP = 
                                                                               new birth pred. ver. keys
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                    [vkb,j ]1
                    local data commitment
                                                                                                                                     
                                                  cmldata                      new birth pred. proofs                     n
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                    [πb,j ]1         
                                                                                predicate comm. randomness          rΦ

A witness wCP is valid for an instance xCP if the following conditions hold:
1. For each i ∈ {i, . . . , m}:
   • The death predicate hash hd,i is computed correctly: hd,i = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , vkd,i ).
   • The death predicate proof πd,i is valid: NIZK.Verify(vkd,i , ikcmldata , πd,i ).
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
   • The birth predicate hash hb,j is computed correctly: hb,j = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , vkb,j ).
   • The birth predicate proof πb,j is valid: NIZK.Verify(vkb,j , jkcmldata , πb,j ).
                                                                         m              n
3. The predicate commitment cmΦ is valid: cmΦ = b2s([hd,i ]1 k [hb,j ]1 k rΦ ).


          Figure 14: Splitting the NP relation Re into two NP relations RBLS and RCP , over Fr and Fp respectively.




                                                                       39
8    System implementation
We implemented our “plain” DPC scheme (Section 4) and our delegable DPC scheme (Section 5), by following
the strategy described in Section 7. The resulting system, named Zexe (Zero knowledge EXEcution), consists
of several Rust libraries: (a) a library for finite field and elliptic curve arithmetic, adapted from [Bow17b]; (b) a
library for cryptographic building blocks, including zkSNARKs for constraint systems (using components
from [Bow17a]); (c) a library with constraints for many of these building blocks; and (d) a library that realizes
our constructions of plain and delegable DPC. Our code base, like our construction, is written in terms of
abstract building blocks, which allows to easily switch between different instantiations of the building blocks.
In the rest of this section we describe the efficient instantiations used in the experiments reported in Section 9.

                                                       libzexe

                                        constraints for building blocks

                                                                   cryptographic
                                       zkSNARK
                                                                  building blocks
                                                       algebra

                                     Figure 15: Stack of libraries comprising Zexe.


Ledger. The ledger L in our prototype is simply an ideal ledger, i.e., an append-only log of valid transactions
that is stored in memory. Of course, in a real-world deployment, this ideal ledger would be replaced by a
distributed protocol that realizes (a suitable approximation of) an ideal ledger. Recall from Section 3.1 that we
require the ledger L to provide a method to efficiently prove and verify membership of a transaction, or one of
its subcomponents, in L. For this, we maintain a Merkle tree [Mer87] atop the list of transactions, using the
collision-resistant hash function CRH described below. This results in the following algorithms for L.
• L.Push(tx): Append tx to the transaction list and update the Merkle tree.
• L.Digest → stL : Return the root of the Merkle tree.
• L.Prove(tx) → wL : Return the authentication path for tx in the Merkle tree.
• L.Verify(stL , tx, wL ) → b: Check that wL is a valid authentication path for tx in a tree with root stL .
Our prototype maintains the Merkle tree in memory, but a real-world deployment would have to maintain it
via a distributed protocol. (Such data structures atop distributed ledgers are used in existing systems [ZCa15].)
Pseudorandom function. Fixing key length and input length at 256 bits, we instantiate PRF using the
Blake2s hash function [ANWW13]: PRFk (x) := b2s(kkx) for k, x ∈ {0, 1}256 .
Elliptic curves. Our implementation strategy (see Section 7) involves several elliptic curves: two pairing-
friendly curves EBLS and ECP , and two “plain” curves EEd/BLS and EEd/CP whose base field respectively
matches the prime-order subgroup of EBLS and ECP . Details about these curves are in Figure 16; the
parameter used to generate the BLS curve EBLS is x = 3 · 246 · (7 · 13 · 499) + 1 (see Section 7 for why).
NIZKs. We instantiate the NIZKs used for the NP relation Re via zero-knowledge succinct non-interactive
arguments of knowledge (zk-SNARKs), which makes our DPC schemes succinct (see Remark 4.1). Concretely,
we rely on the simulation-extractable zkSNARK of Groth and Maller [GM17], used over the pairing-friendly
elliptic curves EBLS (for proving predicates’ satisfiability) and ECP (for proving validity of these latter proofs).
DLP-hard group. Several instantiations of cryptographic primitives introduced below rely on the hardness
of extracting discrete logarithms in a prime order group. We generate these groups via a group generator
SampleGrp, which on input a security parameter λ (represented in unary), outputs a tuple (G, q, g) that

                                                          40
     name       curve type            embedding       size of prime-order    size of base    size of compressed group elements
                                      degree          subgroup               field           (rounded to multiples of 8 bytes)
                                                                                             G1             G2
     EEd/BLS    twisted Edwards       —               s                      r               32              —
     EBLS       BLS                   12              r                      p               48              96
     EEd/CP     twisted Edwards       —               t                      p               48              —
     ECP        short Weierstrass     6               p                      q               104             312

        prime    value                                                                               size in bits   2-adicity
        s        0x4aad957a68b2955982d1347970dec005293a3afc43c8afeb                                  251            1
                 95aee9ac33fd9ff
        r        0x12ab655e9a2ca55660b44d1e5c37b00159aa76fed0000001                                  253            47
                 0a11800000000001
        t        0x35c748c2f8a21d58c760b80d94292763445b3e601ea271e1                                  374            2
                 d75fe7d6eeb84234066d10f5d893814103486497d95295
        p        0x1ae3a4617c510eac63b05c06ca1493b1a22d9f300f5138f1                                  377            46
                 ef3622fba094800170b5d44300000008508c00000000001
        q        0x3848c4d2263babf8941fe959283d8f526663bc5d176b746a                                  782            3
                 f0266a7223ee72023d07830c728d80f9d78bab3596c8617c57
                 9252a3fb77c79c13201ad533049cfe6a399c2f764a12c4024b
                 ee135c065f4d26b7545d85c16dfd424adace79b57b942ae9

                                    Figure 16: The elliptic curves EBLS , ECP , EEd/BLS , EEd/CP .


describes a group G of prime order q generated by g. The discrete-log problem is hard in G. In our prototype
we fix G to be the largest prime-order subgroup of either EEd/BLS or EEd/CP , depending on the context.
Commitments. We instantiate (plain and) trapdoor commitments via Pedersen commitments over G, as
defined in Figure 17; note that the setup algorithm takes as additional input the message length n. Pedersen
commitments are perfectly hiding, and are computationally binding if the discrete-log problem is hard in G.
Collision-resistant hashing. We instantiate CRH via a Pedersen hash function over G, as specified in
Figure 18; note that the setup algorithm takes as additional input the message length n. Collision resistance
follows from hardness of the discrete-logarithm problem [MRK03].
Remark 8.1. Hopwood et al. [HBHW18] note that projecting a twisted Edwards curve point (x, y) to its
x-coordinate is injective when the point is in the curve’s largest prime-order subgroup. Our implementation
uses this fact to reduce the output size of TCM and CRH by projecting their output to its x-coordinate.

                             λ                                                    λ
            TCM.Setup(1 , n) → ppTCM :                             CRH.Setup(1 , n) → ppCRH :
                                                             λ                                                      λ
            1. Sample a group: (G, q, g) ← SampleGrp(1 ).          1. Sample a group: (G, q, g1 ) ← SampleGrp(1 ).
            2. For i ∈ {1, . . . , n}, sample generator hi :       2. For i ∈ {2, . . . , n}, sample generator gi :
                                    r                                                      r
               ri ← Zq ; hi := g i .                                  ri ← Zq ; gi := g i .
                                                 n                                                   n
            3. Output ppTCM := (G, q, g, [hi ]1 ).                 3. Output ppCRH := (G, q, [gi ]1 ).
                                                  n                                                  n
            TCM.Commit(ppTCM , m ∈ {0, 1} ; rcm ) → cm: CRH.Eval(ppCRH , m ∈ {0, 1} ) → h:
                                             n                                        n
            1. Parse ppTCM as (G,Qq, g, [hi ]1 ).       1. Parse ppCRH as (G, q, [gi ]1 ).
                              rcm   n      mi                          Qn      mi
            2. Output cm := g       i=1 hi .            2. Output h := i=1 gi .

                Figure 17: Pedersen commitment scheme.                Figure 18: Pedersen collision-resistant hash.



                                                                 41
9     System evaluation
In Section 9.1 we evaluate individual cryptographic building blocks. In Section 9.2 we evaluate the cost of
NP relations expressed as constraints, as required by the underlying zkSNARK. In Section 9.3 we evaluate the
running time of DPC algorithms. In Section 9.4 we evaluate the sizes of DPC data structures. All reported
measurements were taken on a machine with an Intel Xeon 6136 CPU at 3.0 GHz with 252 GB of RAM.

9.1   Cryptographic building blocks
We are interested in two types of costs associated with a given cryptographic building block: the native
execution cost, which are the running times of certain algorithms on a CPU; and the constraint cost, which
are the numbers of constraints required to express certain invariants, to be used by the underlying zkSNARK.
Native execution cost. The zkSNARK dominates native execution cost, and the costs of all other building
blocks are negligible in comparison. Therefore we separately report only the running times of the zkSNARK,
which in our case is a protocol due to Groth and Maller [GM17], abbreviated as GM17. When instantiated
over the elliptic curve EBLS , the GM17 prover takes  µs per constraint (with 12 threads), while the GM17
verifier takes  n µs + 9.5 ms on an input with n field elements (with 1 thread). When instantiated over the
elliptic curve ECP , the respective prover and verifier costs are 147 µs per constraint and . n ms + 34 ms.
Constraint cost. There are three building blocks that together account for the majority of the cost of NP
statements that we use. These are: (a) the Blake2s PRF, which requires 21792 constraints to map a 64-byte
input to a 32-byte output; (b) the Pedersen collision-resistant hash, which requires 5n constraints for an input
of n bits; and (c) the GM17 verifier, which requires 14n + 52626 constraints for an n-bit input.

9.2   The execute NP relation
In many zkSNARK constructions, including the one that we use, one must express all the relevant checks
in the given NP relation as (rank-1) quadratic constraints over a certain large prime field. The goal is to
minimize the number of such constraints because the prover’s costs grow (quasi)linearly in this number.
    In our DPC scheme we use a zkSNARK for the NP relation Re in Fig. 9 and, similarly, in our delegable
DPC scheme we use it for the NP relation Rdele in Fig. 23. More precisely, for efficiency reasons explained in
Section 7, we split Re into the two NP relations RBLS and RCP in Fig. 14, which we prove via zkSNARKs
over the pairing-friendly curves EBLS and ECP , respectively. (We also similarly split Rdele .)
    Table 3 reports the number of constraints that that we use to express RBLS , as a function of the number of
input (m) and output (n) records, and additionally reports its primary contributors. Table 4 does the same for
RCP . These tables show that for each input record costs are dominated by verification of a Merkle tree path
and the verification of a (death predicate) proof; while for each output record costs are dominated by the
verification of a (birth predicate) proof.

9.3   DPC algorithms
In Table 1 we report the running times of algorithms in our plain DPC and delegable DPC implementations
for two input and two output records. Note that for Execute and Verify, we have excluded costs of ledger
operations (such as retrieving an authentication path or scanning for duplicate serial numbers) because these
depend on how a ledger is realized, which is orthogonal to our work. Also, we assume that Execute receives
as inputs the SNARK proofs checked by the NP relation. Producing each of these proofs requires invoking the



                                                      42
GM17 prover, over the elliptic curve EBLS , for the relevant birth or death predicate; we provide the amortized
time per constraint for this in Section 9.1.
    Observe that the overhead incurred by delegable DPC over plain DPC is negligible, and that, as expected,
Setup and Execute are the most costly algorithms, as they invoke costly zkSNARK setup and proving
algorithms. To mitigate these costs, Setup and Execute are executed on 12 threads; everything else is executed
with 1 thread. Overall, we learn that Execute takes less than a minute, and Verify takes tens of milliseconds.

9.4     DPC data structures
Addresses. An address public key in a DPC scheme is a point on the elliptic curve EEd/BLS , which is 32
bytes when compressed (see Fig. 16); the corresponding secret key is 64 bytes and consists of a PRF seed
(32 bytes) and commitment randomness (32 bytes). In a delegable DPC scheme, address public keys do not
change, but address secret keys are 96 bytes, because they additionally contain the 32-byte secret key of a
randomizable signature scheme over the elliptic curve EEd/BLS (see Fig. 10).
Transactions. A transaction in a DPC scheme, with two input and two output records, is 968 bytes. It
contains two zkSNARK proofs: πBLS , over the elliptic curve EBLS , and πCP , over the curve ECP . Each proof
consists of two G1 and one G2 elements from its respective curve, amounting to 192 bytes for πBLS and 520
for πCP (both in compressed form). In general, for m input records and n output records, transactions are
32m + 32n + 840 bytes. In a delegable DPC scheme, a transaction additionally contains a 64-byte signature
for each input record. See Table 2 for a detailed break down of all of these costs.
Record contents. We set a record’s payload to be 32 bytes long; if a predicate needs longer data then it can
set the payload to be the hash of this data, and use non-determinism to access the data. The foregoing choice
means that all contents of a record add up to 224 bytes, since a record consists of an address public key (32
bytes), the 32-byte payload, hashes of birth and death predicates (48 bytes each), a serial number nonce (32
bytes), and commitment randomness (32 bytes).

                    Plain DPC     Delegable DPC                                     Plain DPC             Delegable DPC
  Setup             109.62 s      109.3 s            2 inputs and 2 outputs         968                   1096
  GenAddress        380 µs        780 µs             m inputs and n outputs         32m + 32n + 840       96m + 32n + 840
  Execute           52.5 s        53.4 s             Per input record:
                                                       Serial number                32                    32
  Verify            46 ms         47 ms                Signature                    —                     64
                                                     Per output record:
      Table 1: Cost of DPC algorithms for 2 inputs     Commitment                   32                    32
      and 2 outputs.                                 Memorandum                     32                    32
                                                     zkSNARK proof over ECP         520                   520
                                                     zkSNARK proof over EBLS        192                   192
                                                     Predicate commitment           32                    32
                                                     Local data commitment          32                    32
                                                     Ledger digest                  32                    32

                                                                   Table 2: Size of a DPC transaction (in bytes).




                                                              43
                                                    Plain DPC                      Delegable DPC
Total with 2 inputs and 2 outputs                   387412                         414339
Below we provide a breakdown of the number of constraints with m input and n output records.
Per input record     Total                          117699                         125401
                     Enforce validity of:
                       Merkle tree path             81824                          81824
                       Address key pair             3822                           8435
                       Serial number computation    22301                          25390
                       Record commitment            9752                           9752
Per output record    Total                          15427                          19523
                     Enforce validity of:
                       Serial number nonce          5417                           9513
                       Record commitment            10010                          10010
Other:               Enforce validity of:
                       Predicate commitment         21792 · d 43 (m + n) + 12 e    21792 · d 34 (m + n) + 12 e
                       Local data commitment        7168 · m + 6144 · n            8192 · m + 6144 · n
                     Miscellaneous                  7368                           8651

                                 Table 3: Number of constraints for RBLS .



                                                   Plain DPC                      Delegable DPC
 Total with 2 inputs and 2 outputs                 439224                         439476
 Below we provide a breakdown of the number of constraints with m input and n output records.
 Per input record     Total                        87569                          87569
                      Enforce validity of:
                        Death predicate ver. key   45827                          45827
                        Death predicate proof      41742                          41742
 Per output record    Total                        87569                          87569
                      Enforce validity of:
                        Birth predicate ver. key   45827                          45827
                        Birth predicate proof      41742                          41742
 Other                Enforce validity of:
                        Predicate commitment       21792 · d 34 (m + n) + 12 e    21792 · d 34 (m + n) + 12 e
                      Miscellaneous                1780                           2032

                                 Table 4: Number of constraints for RCP .




                                                    44
A     Proof of security for our DPC scheme
We prove that our DPC construction (see Section 4) satisfies the security definition in Section 3.3. To do this,
for every real-world (efficient) adversary A, we construct an ideal-world (efficient) simulator S such that the
ideal-world and real-world executions are computationally indistinguishable with respect to any (efficient)
environment E. We proceed in three parts: in Appendix A.1 we describe building blocks used to construct
the simulator S; in Appendix A.2 we describe the simulator S; in Appendix A.3 we argue that the ideal-world
and the real-world executions are computationally indistinguishable.

A.1    Building blocks for the simulator
We describe various algorithms that are used as sub-routines in the simulator S.
Trapdoor commitments. Recall from Section 4.1 that a trapdoor commitment scheme is a commitment
scheme with auxiliary algorithms (SimSetup, Equivocate) that enable one to open a commitment cm to any
chosen message. Below we restrict cm to be a commitment to the empty string ε because this is sufficient for
the proof of security of our DPC scheme.
• Trapdoor setup: on input a security parameter, TCM.SimSetup samples public parameters ppTCM and a
  trapdoor tdTCM such that ppTCM is indistinguishable from public parameters sampled by TCM.Setup.
• Equivocation: on input public parameters ppTCM , trapdoor tdTCM , commitment cm to ε, corresponding
  commitment randomness rcm (so that TCM.Commit(ppTCM , ε; rcm ) = cm), and target message m0 ,
                                                        0
  TCM.Equivocate outputs commitment randomness rcm         such that TCM.Commit(ppTCM , m0 ; rcm
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                 ) = cm.
                                             0
  Moreover, if rcm is uniformly random then rcm is statistically close to uniformly random.
    In Figure 19 we instantiate these algorithms for the Pedersen commitment scheme. Note that the real and
                                                                                0
simulated public parameters are identical; moreover, the trapdoor randomness rcm   is the real randomness rcm
shifted by uniformly random field elements, and is hence statistically close to rcm .
                    λ                                                                                  0        n      0
 TCM.SimSetup(1 , n) → (ppTCM , tdTCM )                       TCM.Equivocate(ppTCM , tdTCM , cm, rcm , m ∈ {0, 1} ) → rcm
                                                                                               n
 1. Sample a group: (G, q, g) ← SampleGrp(1 ).
                                                λ
                                                              1. Parse ppTCM as (G, q, g, [hi ]1 ).
                                                                                     n
 2. For i ∈ {1, . . . , n}:                                   2. Parse tdTCM as [ri ]1 . P
                                                                         0                n         0
                                                  r
    sample ri uniformly from Zq , and set hi := g i .         3. Output rcm := rcm − i=1 ri mi mod q.
                                    n                  n
 3. Output (ppTCM := (G, q, g, [hi ]1 ), tdTCM := [ri ]1 ).

                 Figure 19: Simulated setup and equivocation algorithms for the Pedersen commitment scheme.

NIZKs. The scheme NIZK = (Setup, Prove, Verify) is a simulation-extractable non-interactive zero
knowledge argument. Formally stating the properties of this scheme involves several auxiliary algorithms.
– Trapdoor setup: on input a security parameter and a description of an NP relation R, NIZK.SimSetup
  outputs a set of public parameters ppNIZK and a trapdoor tdNIZK .
– Simulation: on input public parameters ppNIZK , trapdoor tdNIZK , NP instance x, and (optionally) auxiliary
  information aux, NIZK.Simulate outputs a simulated proof π.
– Extraction: on input public parameters ppNIZK , trapdoor tdNIZK , NP instance x, and proof π, NIZK.Extract
  outputs a witness w such that (x, w) ∈ R (allegedly).
We can now state the properties satisfied by NIZK.
• Completeness: for every NP relation R and instance-witness pair (x, w) ∈ R,
                                                        ppNIZK ← NIZK.Setup(1λ , R)
                                                                                    
         Pr NIZK.Verify(ppNIZK , x, π) = 1                                             =1 .
                                                  (x, π) ← NIZK.Prove(ppNIZK , x, w)

                                                                 45
• Perfect zero knowledge: for every relation R and efficient adversary A,
     "                                  #       "                                            #
       ppNIZK ← NIZK.Setup(1λ , R)                (ppNIZK , tdNIZK ) ← NIZK.SimSetup(1λ , R)
  Pr                                       = Pr
       AS1 (·,·) (ppNIZK , aux) = 1               AS2 (·,·) (ppNIZK , aux) = 1

  where the two oracles are defined as follows
  – S1 (x, w) := “if (x, w) ∈ R then NIZK.Prove(ppNIZK , x, w), else abort”;
  – S2 (x, w) := “if (x, w) ∈ R then NIZK.Simulate(ppNIZK , tdNIZK , x), else abort”.
• Simulation extractability: for every relation R and efficient adversary A,
                                                                                           
        (x, π) 6∈ Q                           (ppNIZK , tdNIZK ) ← NIZK.SimSetup(1λ , R)
   Pr  (x, w) 6∈ R                                                (x, π) ← AS(·) (ppNIZK )  = negl (λ) ,
                                                                                           
        NIZK.Verify(ppNIZK , x, π) = 1           w ← NIZK.Extract(ppNIZK , tdNIZK , x, π)

  where S(x) := NIZK.Simulate(ppNIZK , tdNIZK , x) and Q is the set of query-answer pairs between the
  adversary A and the simulated-proof oracle S.

A.2      The ideal-world simulator
The ideal-word simulator S will interact with the ideal functionality FDPC and with the environment E. Note
that for UC security it suffices to show security against a dummy real-world adversary A that simply forwards
all instructions from the environment E [Can01]. Since our security definition is a special case of UC security,
we inherit this simplification, and thus only consider such an adversary A. The pseudocode for S is provided
below; auxiliary subroutines are provided in Figure 20.
Setup.
1. Initialize an empty table S.Records that maps record commitments to their contents.
2. Initialize an empty table S.AddrPk that maps address public keys to their secret keys.
3. Initialize an empty transaction ledger L.
4. Sample simulated public parameters and trapdoor: (pp, td) ← DPC.SimSetup(1λ ). (See Fig. 20.)
5. Define

                 SampleAddrPk(·) := CM.Commit(ppCM , ε; ·) ,
                      SampleCm(·) := TCM.Commit(ppTCM , ε; ·) ,
                       SampleSn(·) := “sample uniformly random string of correct length” .

6. Start ideal-world execution with the above (SampleAddrPk, SampleCm, SampleSn).
At this point, the simulator will receive messages notifying it of transactions and of messages sharing contents
of newly-created records. The simulator handles each case separately.

Transaction notifications.
• From environment. When E instructs a corrupted party to invoke L.Push(tx):
  1. If DPC.VerifyL (pp, tx) 6= 1, abort.
  2. Parse the real-world transaction tx as ([sni ]m          n
                                                    1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?).
                    m          m       n
  3. Compute ([ri ]1 , [aski ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux) ← DPC.ExtractExecute(pp, td, tx). [See Figure 20.]
  4. For every i ∈ {1, . . . , m}:

                                                      46
      (a) Parse the real-world record ri as (apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i , ρi , ri , cmi ).
      (b) Parse the address secret key aski as (skPRF,i , rpk,i ).
      (c) If S.Records[cmi ] 6= ri , abort. (Note: Captures binding property of the commitment.)
      (d) If L.Contains(cmi ) = 0, abort. (Note: Captures existence of record.)
      (e) Create the ideal-world record ri := (cmi , apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i ).
      (f) If S.AddrPk[apki ] = ⊥:
               i. Invoke FDPC .GenAddress(apki ).
              ii. Insert apki into S.AddrPk: S.AddrPk[apki ] := aski .
      (g) Else, if S.AddrPk[apki ] 6= aski , abort. (Note: Captures uniqueness of secret key.)
  5. For every j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
      (a) Parse the real-world record rj as (apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj , rj , cmj ).
      (b) If the serial number nonce ρj was seen in a prior extracted transaction, or if ρj = ρk for k 6= j,
          abort. (Note: Captures uniqueness of nonce.)
      (c) Set S.Records[cmj ] := rj .
  6. Construct instance for Re : xe := (stL , [sni ]m             n
                                                        1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
  7. Construct witness for Re : we := ([ri ]1 , [wL,i ]1 , [aski ]m
                                                m            m                   n
                                                                        1 , [rj ]1 , aux).
  8. If (xe , we ) 6∈ Re , abort.
  9. Invoke FDPC .Execute([ri ]m              m         m         n           n                n       n          n
                                  1 , [metai ]1 , [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , [apkj ]1 , [payloadj ]1 , [Φb,j ]1 , [Φd,j ]1 , aux, memo).
                                  n
 10. Receive from FDPC : [rj ]1 .
 11. Receive from FDPC : (Execute, [sni ]m                 n
                                               1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
 12. Append the real-world transaction tx to the ledger L.
• From ideal functionality. When FDPC broadcasts (Execute, [sni ]m                            n
                                                                                    1 , [cmj ]1 , memo):
                      n                              L                 m            n
  1. Compute ([rj ]1 , tx) ← DPC.SimExecute (pp, td, [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo). (See Fig. 20.)
  2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, set S.Records[cmj ] := rj .
  3. Append the real-world transaction tx to the ledger L.

Record authorization notification.

• From environment. When E instructs a corrupted party to send (RecordAuth, r, P) to P:
  1. Parse the real-world record r as (apk, payload, Φb , Φd , ρ, r, cm).
  2. Invoke FDPC .ShareRecord(r, P) with r := (cm, apk, payload, Φb , Φd ).
• From ideal functionality. When FDPC sends (RecordAuth, r, r):
  1. Parse the ideal record r as (cm, apk, payload, Φb , Φd ).
  2. Retrieve the real-world record r = S.Records[cm], and set the serial number nonce ρ := r.ρ.
  3. Define new record commitment message m := (apkkpayloadkΦb kΦd kρ).
  4. Compute new commitment randomness r0 ← TCM.Equivocate(ppTCM , tdTCM , cm, r, m).
  5. Construct the new real-world record r0 := (apk, payload, Φb , Φd , ρ, r0 , cm).
  6. Set S.Records[cm] := r0 .
  7. Send to A: (RecordAuth, r0 ) .




                                                             47
  DPC.SimSetup
                             λ
  Input: security parameter 1
  Output: simulated public parameters pp and trapdoor td
1. Sample parameters for commitment: ppCM ← CM.Setup(1λ ).
2. Sample simulated parameters for trapdoor commitment: (ppTCM , tdTCM ) ← TCM.SimSetup(1λ ).
3. Sample parameters for CRH: ppCRH ← CRH.Setup(1λ ).
4. Sample simulated parameters for NIZK for Re : (ppe , tde ) ← NIZK.SimSetup(1λ , Re ).
5. Set pp := (ppCM , ppTCM , ppCRH , ppe ).
6. Set td := (tdTCM , tde ).
7. Output (pp, td).
                     L
  DPC.SimExecute
  Input:
  • public parameters pp and trapdoor td
                             m
  • old serial numbers [sni ]1
                                    n
  • new record commitments [cmj ]1
  • transaction memorandum memo
                           n
  Output: new records [rj ]1 and transaction tx

1. For j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
    (a) Set new serial number nonce ρj := CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
    (b) Set address public key, payload, predicates, and commitment randomness to be the empty string:
        apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , rj := ε.
    (c) Construct dummy record: rj := (apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj , rj , cmj ).
2. Retrieve current ledger digest: stL ← L.Digest.
                                             x
3. Construct instance for relation Re : e := (stL , [sni ]m            n
                                                             1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
4. Generate simulated proof for Re : πe ← NIZK.Simulate(ppe , tde , e ).        x
5. Construct transaction: tx := ([sni ]m             n
                                           1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?), where ? := (stL , πe ).
                n
6. Output ([rj ]1 , tx).
  DPC.ExtractExecute
  Input:
  • public parameters pp and trapdoor td
  • transaction tx
  Output:
                        m
           records [ri ]1
         
  • old                               m
           address secret keys [aski ]1
                     n
  • new records [rj ]1
  • auxiliary predicate input aux

1. Parse tx as ([sni ]m          n
                      1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?) and ? as (stL , πe ).
                                             x
2. Construct instance for relation Re : e := (stL , [sni ]m                   n
                                                                   1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
                         w
3. Obtain witness: e ← NIZK.Extract(ppe , tde , e , πe ).  x
                m
                          w
4. Parse the witness e as ([ri ]m
                           m        n
                                         w       m          m        n
                                      1 , [ L,i ]1 , [aski ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux).
5. Output ([ri ]1 , [aski ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux).

                               Figure 20: Several subroutines used by the ideal-world simulator S.




                                                                  48
A.3    Proof of security by hybrid argument
We use a sequence of hybrids, each identified by a game Gi , to prove that the outputs of the environment E when
interacting with the real-world (dummy) adversary A and the ideal-world simulator S are computationally
indistinguishable. We denote by Outputi (E) the output of E in game Gi , and by G0 the real-world execution.

• G1 (sample parameters):
  This game is the real-world execution modified as follows.
  – E interacts with S instead of A.
  – S uses DPC.Setup to generate public parameters pp, and gives these to E.
  – S maintains the ledger L for E (it appends to L any pushed transaction passing the checks in DPC.Verify).
  – S forwards messages from E to L and other parties.
  – S forwards messages from other honest parties to E.
  Output1 (E) is perfectly indistinguishable from Output0 (E) since S samples the public parameters honestly,
  maintains the ledger identically to the ideal ledger, and otherwise behaves like the dummy adversary.

• G2 (simulate setup):
  S invokes DPC.SimSetup instead of DPC.Setup.               Output2 (E) is perfectly indistinguishable from
  Output1 (E) since NIZK is perfect zero knowledge.

• G3 (simulate proofs):
  In all honest party transactions, S replaces NIZK proofs with simulated proofs produced via NIZK.Simulate.
  Output3 (E) is perfectly indistinguishable from Output2 (E) since NIZK is perfect zero knowledge.

• G4 (simulate serial numbers):
  In all honest party transactions, S replaces all serial numbers with uniformly random elements sampled
  from PRF’s codomain. Since PRF is a pseudorandom function, and E does not know the secret key used to
  compute it, Output4 (E) is computationally indistinguishable from Output3 (E).

• G5 (simulate commitments and equivocate commitment openings):
  In all honest party transactions, S replaces record commitments with commitments to the empty string
  ε. In all messages from honest parties to corrupted parties containing record contents, S replaces the
  actual commitment randomness with randomness produced by TCM.Equivocate. Output5 (E) is perfectly
  indistinguishable from Output4 (E) since TCM is perfectly hiding and equivocation produces commitment
  randomness that is statistically close to uniform.

• G6 (handle adversarial transactions):
  For every corrupted party transaction, S extracts an NP instance xe and witness we for Re from the included
  proof and then proceeds as follows.
  – If (xe , we ) 6∈ R, S aborts. If NIZK is simulation-extractable, this occurs with negligible probability.
  – For all i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, if the contents of any ri are different from those seen in any RecordAuth from
    an honest party or in the output of a previously extracted transaction, S aborts. If TCM is a binding
    commitment scheme, then this occurs with negligible probability.
  – For all i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, if the extracted secret key aski for apki differs from the secret key extracted for
    apki in a prior transaction, S aborts. If CM is a binding commitment scheme, then this occurs with
    negligible probability.



                                                       49
  – For all j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, if the serial number nonce ρj matches one extracted in a prior transaction, S
    aborts. If CRH is a collision-resistant hash, then this occurs with negligible probability because the serial
    number nonce is the output of CRH evaluated (in part) over the serial numbers of the input records. If
    this input is distinct across two different invocations of CRH, then collision resistance guarantees that a
    nonce collision happens with negligible probability. Now for the transaction to be valid, it must contain
    serial numbers not seen before on the ledger. Therefore, the inputs to CRH are never repeated.
  Output6 (E) is therefore computationally indistinguishable from Output5 (E).

The final game is distributed identically to the operation of S from the point of view of E. We have thus
shown that E’s advantage in distinguishing the interaction with S from the interaction with A is negligible.




                                                       50
B     Construction of a delegable DPC scheme
We provide more details on the delegable DPC scheme discussed in Section 5. First we give details on
randomizable signatures (Appendix B.1), and then give pseudocode for the DPC construction (Appendix B.2).

B.1   Definition and construction of a randomizable signature scheme
A randomizable signature scheme is a tuple of algorithms SIG = (Setup, Keygen, Sign, Verify, RandPk,
RandSig) that enables a party to sign messages, while also allowing randomization of public keys and
signatures to prevent linking across multiple signatures.
    We have already described the syntax of the scheme’s algorithms, and summarized its security properties,
in Section 5.2. Now we discuss in more detail the security properties, and the construction used in our code.
Security properties. The signature scheme SIG satisfies the following security properties.

• Existential unforgeability under randomization (EUR). For every efficient adversary A, the following
  probability is negligible:
                                                                                                   
             ∗                                   ∗   ∗                      ppSIG ← SIG.Setup(1λ )
       m 6∈ Q and SIG.Verify(ppSIG , pkSIG , m , σ )         (pkSIG , skSIG ) ← SIG.Keygen(ppSIG ) 
   Pr                          or
                                                                                                   
                                                                ∗    ∗ ∗           S(·)
                                                             (m , σ , rSIG ) ← A (ppSIG , pkSIG ) 
                                                                                                    
           m∗ 6∈ Q and SIG.Verify(ppSIG , pk
                                          ˆ , m∗ , σ ∗ )
                                                       
                                            SIG           ˆ                                    ∗
                                                          pkSIG ← SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , rSIG )

  where S(m) := SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG , m) and Q are the queries made by A to the signing oracle S.

• Unlinkability. Every efficient adversary A = (A1 , A2 ) has at most negligible advantage in guessing the bit
  b in the IND-RSIG game below.


                                    SIG   λ
                       IND-RSIGA (1 ):
                                                                                          λ
                       1. Generate public parameters: ppSIG ← SIG.Setup(1 ).
                       2. Generate key pair: (pkSIG , skSIG ) ← SIG.Keygen(ppSIG ).
                                                                             SIG.Sign(ppSIG ,skSIG ,·)
                       3. Obtain message from adversary: m ← A1                                        (ppSIG , pkSIG ).
                       4. Sample a bit b uniformly at random.
                       5. If b = 0:
                                                                 0      0
                           (a) Sample new key pair: (pkSIG , skSIG ) ← SIG.Keygen(ppSIG ).
                                                                                   0
                           (b) Sign message: σ ← SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG , m).
                                              0
                           (c) Set c := (pkSIG , σ).
                       6. If b = 1:
                           (a) Sign message: σ ← SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG , m).
                           (b) Sample randomness rSIG .
                           (c) Randomize public key: ˆ         pkSIG ← SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , rSIG ).
                           (d) Randomize signature: σ̂ ← SIG.RandSig(ppSIG , σ, rSIG ).
                           (e) Set c := (pk ˆ , σ̂).
                                              SIG
                                    SIG.Sign(ppSIG ,skSIG ,·)
                       7. Output A2                           (ppSIG , pkSIG , c).

• Injective randomization. For every efficient adversary A, the following probability is negligible:

                                                                                ppSIG ← SIG.Setup(1λ )
                                                                                                           
                                    r1 6= r2
   Pr                                                                                                         .
        SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , r1 ) = SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , r2 )    (pkSIG , r1 , r2 ) ← A(ppSIG )


                                                                   51
Construction. In Fig. 21 we provide a modification of the Schnorr signature scheme [Sch91] that is
randomizable. We briefly explain why this modification satisfies the security properties above.

• Existential unforgeability under randomization (EUR). Given an efficient adversary A that breaks EUR of
  randomizable Schnorr signatures, we construct an efficient adversary A0 that breaks existential unforgeability
  of standard Schnorr signatures. In detail, A0 forwards signature queries from A to its own signing oracle
  and returns the answers to A and then, when A outputs a tuple (m∗ , σ ∗ , rSIG
                                                                              ∗
                                                                                  ), A0 outputs the tuple (m∗ , σ)
  where σ is computed as follows. If σ is a valid signature for m under pkSIG then σ := σ ∗ . Otherwise, A0
                                       ∗                          ∗

  “undoes” the randomization of σ ∗ = (s, e) by setting σ := (s + e · rSIG
                                                                       ∗
                                                                            , e); thus if A outputs a forgery for
                                0
  a randomization of pkSIG , A translates it back into a forgery for pkSIG . In sum, since standard Schnorr
  signatures are secure in the random oracle model assuming hardness of discrete logarithms [PS00], so is
  the randomizable variant under the same assumptions.

• Unlinkability of public keys. Public keys are unlinkable because SIG.RandPk multiplies the public key pk
  (which is a group element) by a random group element; the result is statistically independent of pk.

• Unlinkability of signatures. The only part of a Schnorr signature that depends on the public or secret key
  is the scalar s. Since SIG.RandSig adds a random shift to s, the result is statistically independent of the
  signature’s original key pair.

• Injective randomization. Fixing all inputs but for rSIG , SIG.RandPk is a permutation over G. Hence, finding
  collisions over the randomness is not possible.

                            λ
               SIG.Setup(1 ) → ppSIG                              SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG , m) → σ
                                                         λ
               1. Sample a group: (G, q, g) ← SampleGrp(1 ).      1. Parse ppSIG as (G, q, g, H).
               2. Sample cryptographic hash function H.           2. Sample a scalar k uniformly from Zq .
                                                                               k
               3. Output ppSIG := (G, q, g, H).                   3. Set r := g and e := H(rkm).
               SIG.Keygen(ppSIG ) → (pkSIG , skSIG )              4. Set s := k − xe.
               1. Parse ppSIG as (G, q, g, H).                    5. Output σ := (s, e).
               2. Sample a scalar x uniformly from Zq .
                                               x
               3. Output (pkSIG , skSIG ) := (g , x).             SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG , rSIG ) → ˆpkSIG
               SIG.Verify(ppSIG , pkSIG , m, σ) → b               1. Parse ppSIG as (G, q, g, H).
                                                                             ˆ                  rSIG
               1. Parse ppSIG as (G, q, g, H).                    2. Output pk SIG := pkSIG · g      .
               2. Parse σ as (s, e).                              SIG.RandSig(ppSIG , σ, rSIG ) → σ̂
                              s   e        s+xe
               3. Set rv := g pkSIG = g         .                 1. Parse ppSIG as (G, q, g, H).
               4. Set ev := H(rv km).                             2. Parse σ as (s, e).
               5. Check if e = ev .                               3. Output σ̂ := (s − e · rSIG , e).

        Figure 21: Construction of a randomizable signature scheme based on the Schnorr signature scheme [Sch91].



B.2    Construction of a delegable DPC scheme
Fig. 22 provides pseudocode that, together with the modified NP relation Rdel
                                                                           e given in Fig. 23, formalizes the
high-level description of a delegable DPC scheme from Section 5.3. In both figures, we highlighted changes
from the “plain” DPC scheme in Section 4.2. The only step in DPC.Execute that must be performed by the
delegator is Step 7a; all other steps can be performed by the worker without knowing the signature secret key.




                                                           52
 DPC.Setup                                                                DPC.GenAddress
                             λ
 Input: security parameter 1                                              Input: public parameters pp
 Output: public parameters pp                                             Output: address key pair (apk, ask)
1. Generate commitment parameters:                                      1. Generate authorization key pair:
                        λ                              λ
   ppCM ← CM.Setup(1 ), ppTCM ← TCM.Setup(1 ).                             (pkSIG , skSIG ) ← SIG.Keygen(ppSIG ) .
                                                         λ
2. Generate CRH parameters: ppCRH ← CRH.Setup(1 ).                      2. Sample secret key skPRF for pseudorandom function PRF.
                                                           λ
3. Generate signature parameters: ppSIG ← SIG.Setup(1 ).                3. Sample randomness rpk for commitment scheme TCM.
                                     del
4. Generate NIZK parameters for Re (Fig. 23):                           4. Set address public key
                        λ   del
   ppe ← NIZK.Setup(1 , Re ).                                              apk := CM.Commit(ppCM , pkSIG kskPRF ; rpk ).
5. Output pp := (ppCM , ppTCM , ppCRH , ppSIG , ppe ).                  5. Set address secret key
                                                                           ask := (skSIG , skPRF , rpk ).
                                                                        6. Output (apk, ask).
                   L
 DPC.Execute
 Input:
   • public
          parameters pp
                                                                                n
                                                      address public keys [apkj ]1
                         m
            records [ri ]1
                                                    
                                                                                  n
                                                      record payloads [payloadj ]1
                                                    
   • old
                                                    
                                       m
            address secret keys [aski ]1      • new                                  n
                                                      record birth predicates [Φb,j ]1
   • auxiliary predicate input aux
                                                    
                                                                                      n
                                                      record death predicates [Φd,j ]1
                                                    
                                                    
   • transaction memorandum memo
                           n
 Output: new records [rj ]1 and transaction tx
1. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, processthe i-th old record as follows:
                                               address public key apki         payload payloadi          comm. rand. ri
                                                                                                                                  
    (a) Parse old record ri as ri =                                                                                                  .
                                             serial number nonce ρi         predicates (Φb,i , Φd,i ) commitment cmi
    (b) If payloadi .isDummy = 1, set ledger membership witness wL,i := ⊥.
        If payloadi .isDummy = 0, compute ledger membership witness for commitment: wL,i ← L.Prove(cmi ).
    (c) Parse address secret key aski as (skSIG,i , skPRF,i , rpk,i ) and derive pkSIG,i from skSIG,i .
    (d) Compute signature randomness: rSIG,i ← PRFskPRF,i (ρi ).
    (e) Compute serial number: sni ← SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG,i , rSIG,i ).
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, construct the j-th new record as follows:
    (a) Compute serial number nonce: ρj := CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
    (b) Construct new record: rj ← DPC.ConstructRecord(pp, apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj ).
3. Retrieve current ledger digest: stL ← L.Digest.
                                          del                   m        n
4. Construct instance for relation Re : xe := (stL , [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
                                         del              m         m           m           m           m         m        n
5. Construct witness for relation Re : we := ([ri ]1 , [wL,i ]1 , [skPRF,i ]1 , [pkSIG,i ]1 , [metai ]1 , [rpk,i ]1 , [rj ]1 , aux).
                                     del
6. Generate proof for relation Re : πe ← NIZK.Prove(ppe , xe , we ).
7. For each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}:
    (a) Sign message: σi ← SIG.Sign(ppSIG , skSIG,i , xe kπe ).
    (b) Randomize signature: σ̂i ← SIG.RandSig(ppSIG , σi , rSIG,i ).
                                             m        n                                      m
8. Construct transaction: tx := ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?), where ? := (stL , πe , [σ̂i ]1 ).
                n
9. Output ([rj ]1 , tx).

               L
 DPC.Verify
 Input: public parameters pp and transaction tx
 Output: decision bit b
                       m        n                                     m
1. Parse tx as ([sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo, ?) and ? as (stL , πe , [σ̂i ]1 ).
2. Check that there are no duplicate serial numbers
    (a) within the transaction tx: sni 6= snj for every distinct i, j ∈ {1, . . . , m};
    (b) on the ledger: L.Contains(sni ) = 0 for every i ∈ {1, . . . , m}.
3. Check that the ledger state is valid: L.ValidateDigest(stL ) = 1.
                                             del                     m       n
4. Construct instance for the relation Re : xe := (stL , [sni ]1 , [cmj ]1 , memo).
                                      del
5. Check proof for the relation Re : NIZK.Verify(ppe , xe , πe ) = 1.
6. For every i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, check that signature verifies: SIG.Verify(ppSIG , sni , xe kπe , σ̂i ) = 1.

                Figure 22: Construction of a delegable DPC scheme. Highlights denote differences from Figure 8.


                                                                     53
                     del
The NP relation Re has instances xe and witnesses we of the following form.
                                                                                                                  m
                                                                  old records
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                             [ri ]1
                                                                                                                      m
                                                                old record membership witnesses             [wL,i ]1
          ledger digest
                                                                                                                        
                                     stL                        old record authorization public keys
                                                                                                                       m 
       old record serial numbers [sni ]m                                                                    [skPRF,i ]1 
                                              and we =  old record serial number secret keys                         m 
 xe =                                   1
                                                              
                                           n                                                                [pkSIG,i ]1 
          new record commitments [cmj ]1
      
                                                                old record address randomness                       m
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                             [rpk,i ]1
          transaction memorandum memo
                                                                                                                          
                                                                new records                                      n
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                             [rj ]1       
                                                                  auxiliary predicate input                  aux

where
• for each i ∈ {1, . . . , m}, ri = (apki , payloadi , Φb,i , Φd,i , ρi , ri , cmi );
• for each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, rj = (apkj , payloadj , Φb,j , Φd,j , ρj , rj , cmj ).
                                          m          m                   m           m m      m                
                                     [cmi ]1 [apki ]1 [payloadi ]1 [Φd,i ]1 [Φb,i ]1 [sni ]1 memo
Define the local data ldata :=             n          n                   n           n n                         .
                                     [cmj ]1 [apkj ]1 [payloadj ]1 [Φd,j ]1 [Φb,j ]1 aux
A witness we is valid for an instance xe if the following conditions hold:
1. For each i ∈ {i, . . . , m}:
   • If ri is not dummy, wL,i proves that the commitment cmi is in a ledger with digest stL : L.Verify(stL , cmi , wL,i ) = 1.
   • The address public key apki matches the authorization public key pkSIG,i and the serial number secret key skPRF,i :
         apki = CM.Commit(ppCM , pkSIG,i kskPRF,i ; rpk,i ) .
   • The serial number sni is valid: rSIG,i = PRFskPRF,i (ρi ) and sni = SIG.RandPk(ppSIG , pkSIG,i , rSIG,i ).
   • The old record commitment cmi is valid: cmi = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apki kpayloadi kΦb,i kΦd,i kρi ; ri ).
   • The death predicate Φd,i is satisfied by the local data: Φd,i (ikldata) = 1.
2. For each j ∈ {1, . . . , n}:
   • The serial number nonce ρj is computed correctly: ρj = CRH.Eval(ppCRH , jksn1 k . . . ksnm ).
   • The new record commitment cmj is valid: cmj = TCM.Commit(ppTCM , apkj kpayloadj kΦb,j kΦd,j kρj ; rj ).
   • The birth predicate Φb,j is satisfied by the local data: Φb,j (jkldata) = 1.


                                                             del
                           Figure 23: The NP relation Re . Highlights denote differences from Figure 9.




                                                                      54
C      Extensions in functionality and in security
We summarize some natural extensions of our DPC construction that give richer functionality, as well as
methods to prove security notions beyond standalone non-adaptive security.
Storing data in addresses. For some applications it can be useful to verifiably associate address public keys
with additional metadata meta. One can easily modify our construction to achieve this by using the address
public key commitment to additionally commit to meta. To prove that a given address public key is bound to
the metadata string meta, one can use a standard non-interactive zero knowledge proof of knowledge.12
     With such a mechanism in hand, we can realise various useful functionality like on-ledger encryption: a
user stores an encryption public key in the metadata of one of her addresses, and others can later use this
public key to encrypt information about records created for her, and store the resulting ciphertext in the
transaction’s memorandum. This method, used for example in Zerocash [BCG+ 14], gives users the option to
not use other out-of-band secure communication channels.
Selective disclosure. For compliance purposes, it may be useful to selectively reveal information about
about a transaction to certain parties. Our implementation can be extended to support this by changing
how hashes of predicate verification keys are committed to in a transaction: instead of committing all the
verification keys together, one can instead commit to them in separate commitments. To disclose the predicates
that were invoked in a transaction, a user can then simply open the relevant commitments.
Ledger position. In some applications it may be useful to know the unique ledger position of a record,
i.e., to have this information be part of the local data ldata given as input to predicates. For example, one
can use a record’s ledger position to implement a “time lock” that prevents the record’s consumption until
a pre-specified amount of time has passed since the record’s creation. However, the ledger interface we
described in Section 3.1 does not expose this functionality: L.Prove only returns a proof that a transaction (or
a subcomponent thereof) appears on the ledger, and not its position. One can augment L.Prove to instead
output the transaction’s ledger position posL , and a proof that posL is the transaction’s position on the ledger.
Our instantiation of the ledger with a Merkle tree supports this augmentation inherently: the path to the
transaction in the Merkle tree is also its position the tree.
Composable security. The security definition in Section 3.3 is a restriction of UC security definitions to a
single execution at any given time. We can avoid this restriction and prove our construction UC-secure by
replacing our simulation-extractable NIZKs with UC-secure NIZKs. The remainder of the proof would go
through unchanged, and this would achieve composition of multiple protocol instances.
Adaptive security. We can prove adaptive security, with a minor modification to our protocol in Section 4.
The barrier to proving security against adaptive corruptions (even in a standalone setting) is a lack of
forward-secure privacy. Namely, when the adversary corrupts a party P, it gets access to P’s state, which
includes contents of records held by P and address secret keys belonging to P. The adversary can then use
this information to break unlinkability of P’s transactions by deriving the serial numbers of consumed records
and matching these against those present on the ledger.
     In the proof, this problem is reflected in how the simulator S handles serial numbers in honest party
transactions (see Appendix A.2). For honest party transactions, serial numbers are sampled uniformly
at random via SampleSn. When the environment E corrupts an honest party, it can attempt to carry out
the aforementioned linking attack by computing serial numbers via the PRF. Since serial numbers already
published in transactions were derived randomly, they would not match the output of the PRF, allowing E to
distinguish the ideal world from the real world.
  12We do not need these NIZK proofs to be simulation-extractable since we do not extract from them. In fact, in our implementation
we can even use specific sigma-protocols designed to prove knowledge of openings of Pedersen commitments.


                                                                55
    We address this issue as follows. First, we work in the secure-erasure model and ensure that honest parties
delete (a) all records output from Execute (after sending their contents to the intended recipients), and (b) all
records that have been consumed. Hence, at the time a party is corrupted, the state revealed to the adversary
does not contain secrets of past records, so the adversary cannot derive those records’ serial numbers. Next,
we have to convincingly match the address public keys of unconsumed records with corresponding address
secret keys. To do this, we modify DPC.GenAddress to use trapdoor commitments to construct address public
keys. The trapdoor property then allows us to open public keys to the correct secret keys.
    However, these measures by themselves are not enough. Consider the following scenario: the adversary
corrupts an honest user and learns her secret key. For every transaction in the ledger, it computes the serial
number nonces of the output records from the serial numbers of the input records. The adversary can then use
these nonces along with the secret key to derive candidate serial numbers for the output records. If these
candidate serial numbers appear on the ledger, then the adversary learns that the record has been consumed.
    To prevent this, we randomize the serial number nonces of all records output by Execute by deriving them
as ρj := CRH(jkrρ,j ksn1 k · · · ksnm ) for some randomness rρ,j that is deleted after invoking Execute. This
randomization ensures that the serial number nonce of an output record cannot be derived deterministically
from the (publicly visible) serial numbers of the input records.
    The above measures, however, are still insufficient: the adversary still knows the secrets of records that
a corrupted party sent to an honest party. After corrupting this honest party, the adversary can learn its
address secret key and therefore derive the serial number of those records. To overcome this obstacle, one can
replace the PRF with a programmable PRF [PS18], for which the owner of the secret key can “program” the
PRF to output pre-determined values on specific inputs: for all polynomial-sized sets S = {(xi , yi )}i , the
owner of a PRF secret key sk can derive a second key skS such that PRFsks (xi ) = yi for each (xi , yi ) ∈ S,
while PRFskS (x) = PRFsk (x) for other inputs x. This fixes the foregoing issue because S can now give E
a programmed PRF secret key for the set S = {(ρi , sni )}i , where ρi is the serial number nonce of the i-th
record received from a corrupted party.




                                                       56
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by: a Google Faculty Award; the National Science Foundation under awards
CNS-1653110 and CNS-1801479; the UC Berkeley Center for Long-Term Cybersecurity; and donations from
the Ethereum Foundation, the Interchain Foundation, and Qtum.


References
[ADMM14a] Marcin Andrychowicz, Stefan Dziembowski, Daniel Malinowski, and Lukasz Mazurek. Fair two-party
          computations via Bitcoin deposits. In Proceedings of the BITCOIN workshop at the 18th International
          Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, FC ’14, pages 105–121, 2014.
[ADMM14b] Marcin Andrychowicz, Stefan Dziembowski, Daniel Malinowski, and Lukasz Mazurek. Secure multiparty
          computations on Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 35th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’14,
          pages 443–458, 2014.
[AFK+ 12]    Diego F. Aranha, Laura Fuentes-Castañeda, Edward Knapp, Alfred Menezes, and Francisco Rodríguez-
             Henríquez. Implementing pairings at the 192-bit security level. In Proceedings of the 5th International
             Conference on Pairing-Based Cryptography, Pairing ’12, pages 177–195, 2012.
[air]        AirSwap. https://www.airswap.io/. Accessed 2018-12-27.
        +
[AKR 13]     Elli Androulaki, Ghassan Karame, Marc Roeschlin, Tobias Scherer, and Srdjan Capkun. Evaluating user
             privacy in Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
             Data Security, FC ’13, pages 34–51, 2013.
[ANWW13] Jean-Phillipe Aumasson, Samuel Neves, Zooko Wilcox-O’Hearn, and Christian Winnerlein. BLAKE2:
         simpler, smaller, fast as MD5. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Applied
         Cryptography and Network Security, ACNS ’13, pages 119–135, 2013.
[BAZB19]     Benedikt Bünz, Shashank Agrawal, Mahdi Zamani, and Dan Boneh. Zether: Towards privacy in a smart
             contract world, 2019. https://crypto.stanford.edu/~buenz/papers/zether.pdf.
[BBD+ 17]    Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breidenbach, Phil Daian, Ari Juels, Yunqi Li, and Xueyuan Zhao. The
             cost of decentralization in 0x and EtherDelta. http://hackingdistributed.com/2017/08/13/
             cost-of-decent/, 2017. Accessed 2019-01-03.
[BCCT13]     Nir Bitansky, Ran Canetti, Alessandro Chiesa, and Eran Tromer. Recursive composition and bootstrapping
             for SNARKs and proof-carrying data. In Proceedings of the 45th ACM Symposium on the Theory of
             Computing, STOC ’13, pages 111–120, 2013.
[BCG+ 13]    Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Daniel Genkin, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. SNARKs for C:
             verifying program executions succinctly and in zero knowledge. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
             International Cryptology Conference, CRYPTO ’13, pages 90–108, 2013.
[BCG+ 14]    Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Christina Garman, Matthew Green, Ian Miers, Eran Tromer, and
             Madars Virza. Zerocash: Decentralized anonymous payments from Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the
             2014 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’14, pages 459–474, 2014. Full version available at
             http://eprint.iacr.org/2014/349.
[BCG+ 15]    Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Matthew Green, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Secure sampling
             of public parameters for succinct zero knowledge proofs. In Proceedings of the 36th IEEE Symposium on
             Security and Privacy, SP ’15, pages 287–304, 2015.
[BCS16]      Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, and Nicholas Spooner. Interactive oracle proofs. In Proceedings of
             the 14th Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC ’16-B, pages 31–60, 2016.


                                                       57
[BCTV14]    Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Succinct non-interactive zero
            knowledge for a von neumann architecture. In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX Security Symposium,
            USENIX ’14, pages 781–796, 2014.
[BCTV17]    Eli Ben-Sasson, Alessandro Chiesa, Eran Tromer, and Madars Virza. Scalable zero knowledge via cycles
            of elliptic curves. Algorithmica, 79(4):1102–1160, 2017. Preliminary version appeared in CRYPTO ’14.
[BDJT17]    Lorenz Breidenbach, Phil Daian, Ari Juels, and Florian Tramèr. To sink frontrunners, send in the sub-
            marines. http://hackingdistributed.com/2017/08/28/submarine-sends/, 2017. Accessed
            2019-01-03.
[BGG18]     Sean Bowe, Ariel Gabizon, and Matthew D. Green. A multi-party protocol for constructing the public
            parameters of the pinocchio zk-SNARK, 2018.
[BGM17]     Sean Bowe, Ariel Gabizon, and Ian Miers. Scalable multi-party computation for zk-SNARK parameters
            in the random beacon model. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2017/1050, 2017. https://eprint.
            iacr.org/2017/1050.
[bin]       Binance. https://www.binance.com/. Accessed 2019-01-03.
[Bit15]     Bitcoin.  Some miners generating invalid blocks.                https://bitcoin.org/en/alert/
            2015-07-04-spv-mining, 2015.
[BKM17]     Iddo Bentov, Ranjit Kumaresan, and Andrew Miller. Instantaneous decentralized poker. In Proceedings of
            the 23rd Annual International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information
            Security, ASIACRYPT ’17, pages 410–440, 2017.
[BLS02]     Paulo S. L. M. Barreto, Ben Lynn, and Michael Scott. Constructing elliptic curves with prescribed
            embedding degrees. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Security in Communication
            Networks, SCN ’02, pages 257–267, 2002.
[Bow17a]    Sean Bowe. Bellman, 2017. https://github.com/zkcrypto/bellman.
[Bow17b]    Sean Bowe. Pairing, 2017. https://github.com/zkcrypto/pairing.
[Can01]     Ran Canetti. Universally composable security: A new paradigm for cryptographic protocols. In
            Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’01, pages
            136–145, 2001.
[CCW18]     Alessandro Chiesa, Lynn Chua, and Matthew Weidner. On cycles of pairing-friendly elliptic curves.
            arXiv math.NT/1803.02067, 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02067.
[CFQ19]     Matteo Campanelli, Dario Fiore, and Anaïs Querol. LegoSNARK: modular design and composition
            of succinct zero-knowledge proofs. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2019/142, 2019. https:
            //eprint.iacr.org/2019/142.
[CGL+ 17]   Alessandro Chiesa, Matthew Green, Jingcheng Liu, Peihan Miao, Ian Miers, and Pratyush Mishra.
            Decentralized anonymous micropayments. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual International Conference
            on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, EUROCRYPT ’17, pages 609–642, 2017.
[Cha14]     Chainalysis. Chainalysis inc. https://chainalysis.com/, 2014.
[Cim18]     Catalin Cimpanu. Zaif cryptocurrency exchange loses $60 million in recent hack. https://www.zdnet.
            com/article/zaif-cryptocurrency-exchange-loses-60-million-in-july-hack/, 2018.
            Accessed 2018-12-27.
[CLN11]     Craig Costello, Kristin E. Lauter, and Michael Naehrig. Attractive subfamilies of BLS curves for
            implementing high-security pairings. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Cryptology
            in India, INDOCRYPT ’11, pages 320–342, 2011.
[coi]       Coinbase. https://www.coinbase.com/. Accessed 2019-01-03.


                                                      58
[Cos12]     Craig Costello. Particularly friendly members of family trees. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
            2012/072, 2012.
[CRR11]     Ran Canetti, Ben Riva, and Guy N. Rothblum. Practical delegation of computation using multiple servers.
            In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’11, pages
            445–454, 2011.
[CRR13]     Ran Canetti, Ben Riva, and Guy N. Rothblum. Refereed delegation of computation. Information and
            Computation, 226:16–36, 2013.
[CZK+ 18]   Raymond Cheng, Fan Zhang, Jernej Kos, Warren He, Nichola Hynes, Noah Johnson, Ari Juels, Andrew
            Miller, and Dawn Song. Ekiden: A platform for confidentiality-preserving, trustworthy, and performant
            smart contract execution. arXiv cs.CR/1804.05141, 2018. https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.05141.
[DDO+ 01]   Alfredo De Santis, Giovanni Di Crescenzo, Rafail Ostrovsky, Giuseppe Persiano, and Amit Sahai. Robust
            non-interactive zero knowledge. In Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Cryptology Conference,
            CRYPTO ’01, pages 566–598, 2001.
[De18]      Nikhilesh De. Coincheck confirms crypto hack loss larger than Mt. Gox. https://www.coindesk.com/
            coincheck-confirms-crypto-hack-loss-larger-than-mt-gox, 2018. Accessed 2018-12-27.
[DF91]      Yvo Desmedt and Yair Frankel. Shared generation of authenticators and signatures (extended abstract).
            In Proceedings of the 11th Annual International Cryptology Conference, CRYPTO ’91, pages 457–469,
            1991.
[Dod07]     Yevgeniy Dodis. Lecture notes: Exposure-resilient cryptography, 2007. https://www.cs.nyu.edu/
            courses/spring07/G22.3033-013/.
[DSC+ 15]   Tien Tuan Anh Dinh, Prateek Saxena, Ee-Chien Chang, Beng Chin Ooi, and Chunwang Zhang. M2R:
            enabling stronger privacy in MapReduce computation. In Proceedings of the 24th USENIX Security
            Symposium, Security ’15, pages 447–462, 2015.
[Ell13]     Elliptic. Elliptic enterprises limited. https://www.elliptic.co/, 2013.
[Eth16]     Ethereum. I thikn the attacker is this miner - today he made over $50k. https://www.reddit.com/
            r/ethereum/comments/55xh2w/i_thikn_the_attacker_is_this_miner_today_he_made/,
            2016.
[Eth18]     Etherscan. The ethereum block explorer, 2018. https://etherscan.io/tokens.
[FK97]      Uriel Feige and Joe Kilian. Making games short. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Symposium on the
            Theory of Computing, STOC ’97, pages 506–516, 1997.
[FKM+ 16]   Nils Fleischhacker, Johannes Krupp, Giulio Malavolta, Jonas Schneider, Dominique Schröder, and
            Mark Simkin. Efficient unlinkable sanitizable signatures from signatures with re-randomizable keys. In
            Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on Practice and Theory in Public-Key Cryptography,
            PKC ’16, pages 301–330, 2016.
[FST10]     David Freeman, Michael Scott, and Edlyn Teske. A taxonomy of pairing-friendly elliptic curves. Journal
            of cryptology, 23(2):224–280, 2010.
[gem]       Gemini. https://gemini.com/dollar. Accessed 2019-01-24.
[GM17]      Jens Groth and Mary Maller. Snarky signatures: Minimal signatures of knowledge from simulation-
            extractable snarks. In Proceedings of the 37th Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
            Techniques, CRYPTO ’17, pages 581–612, 2017.
[GO94]      Oded Goldreich and Yair Oren. Definitions and properties of zero-knowledge proof systems. Journal of
            Cryptology, 7(1):1–32, 1994.



                                                       59
[Gro06]     Jens Groth. Simulation-sound NIZK proofs for a practical language and constant size group signatures.
            In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and
            Information Security, ASIACRYPT ’06, pages 444–459, 2006.
[Har18]     Colin  Harper.      In    search of  stability:    An    overview  of   the  bud-
            ding    stablecoin   ecosystem.            https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/
            search-stability-overview-budding-stablecoin-ecosystem/, 2018.     Accessed 2019-
            1-24.
[HBHW18]    Daira Hopwood, Sean Bowe, Taylor Hornby, and Nathan Wilcox. Zcash protocol specification, 2018.
            URL: https://github.com/zcash/zips/blob/master/protocol/protocol.pdf.
[IKOS06]    Yuval Ishai, Eyal Kushilevitz, Rafail Ostrovsky, and Amit Sahai. Cryptography from anonymity. In
            Proceedings of the 47th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’06, pages
            239–248, 2006.
[JSST16]    Sanjay Jain, Prateek Saxena, Frank Stephan, and Jason Teutsch. How to verify computation with a
            rational network. arXiv cs.GT/1606.05917, 2016. https://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05917.
[KB16]      Ranjit Kumaresan and Iddo Bentov. Amortizing secure computation with penalties. In Proceedings of
            the 23rd ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’16, pages 418–429, 2016.
[KGC+ 17]   Harry Kalodner, Steven Goldfeder, Alishah Chator, Malte Möser, and Arvind Narayanan. BlockSci:
            design and applications of a blockchain analysis platform. arXiv cs.CR/1709.02489, 2017. https:
            //arxiv.org/abs/1709.02489.
[KGC+ 18]   Harry A. Kalodner, Steven Goldfeder, Xiaoqi Chen, S. Matthew Weinberg, and Edward W. Felten.
            Arbitrum: Scalable, private smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium,
            Security ’18, pages 1353–1370, 2018.
[KMB15]     Ranjit Kumaresan, Tal Moran, and Iddo Bentov. How to use Bitcoin to play decentralized poker. In
            Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’15, pages
            195–206, 2015.
[KMS+ 16]   Ahmed E. Kosba, Andrew Miller, Elaine Shi, Zikai Wen, and Charalampos Papamanthou. Hawk: The
            blockchain model of cryptography and privacy-preserving smart contracts. In Proceedings of the 2016
            IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’16, pages 839–858, 2016.
[LTKS15]    Loi Luu, Jason Teutsch, Raghav Kulkarni, and Prateek Saxena. Demystifying incentives in the consensus
            computer. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
            CCS ’15, pages 706–719, 2015.
[MAB+ 13]   Frank McKeen, Ilya Alexandrovich, Alex Berenzon, Carlos V. Rozas, Hisham Shafi, Vedvyas Shanbhogue,
            and Uday R. Savagaonkar. Innovative instructions and software model for isolated execution. In
            Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Hardware and Architectural Support for Security and Privacy,
            HASP ’13, page 10, 2013.
[MBKM19]    Mary Maller, Sean Bowe, Markulf Kohlweiss, and Sarah Meiklejohn. Sonic: Zero-knowledge SNARKs
            from linear-size universal and updateable structured reference strings. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
            2019/099, 2019. https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/099.
[Mer87]     Ralph C. Merkle. A digital signature based on a conventional encryption function. In Proceedings of
            the 7th Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, CRYPTO ’87, pages
            369–378, 1987.
[MGGR13]    Ian Miers, Christina Garman, Matthew Green, and Aviel D. Rubin. Zerocoin: Anonymous distributed
            e-cash from Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’13,
            pages 397–411, 2013.


                                                       60
[Mic00]     Silvio Micali. Computationally sound proofs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 30(4):1253–1298, 2000.
            Preliminary version appeared in FOCS ’94.
[MPJ+ 13]   Sarah Meiklejohn, Marjori Pomarole, Grant Jordan, Kirill Levchenko, Damon McCoy, Geoffrey M.
            Voelker, and Stefan Savage. A fistful of Bitcoins: characterizing payments among men with no names.
            In Proceedings of the 2013 Internet Measurement Conference, IMC ’13, pages 127–140, 2013.
[MRK03]     Silvio Micali, Michael O. Rabin, and Joe Kilian. Zero-knowledge sets. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual
            Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’03, pages 80–91, 2003.
[Nak09]     Satoshi Nakamoto. Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system, 2009. URL: http://www.bitcoin.
            org/bitcoin.pdf.
[NKDM03]    Antonio Nicolosi, Maxwell N. Krohn, Yevgeniy Dodis, and David Mazières. Proactive two-party
            signatures for user authentication. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security
            Symposium, NDSS ’03, 2003.
[PA14]      Nathaniel Popper and Rachel Abrams. Apparent theft at Mt. Gox shakes Bitcoin world. https://www.
            nytimes.com/2014/02/25/business/apparent-theft-at-mt-gox-shakes-bitcoin-world.
            html, 2014. Accessed 2018-12-27.
[par]       Paradex. https://paradex.io/. Accessed 2018-12-27.
[pax]       Paxos Standard. https://paxos.com/standard. Accessed 2019-01-24.
[PB17]      Joseph Poon and Vitalik Buterin. Plasma: Scalable autonomous smart contracts. https://plasma.io/,
            2017.
[Pro18]     The Brooklyn Project. An overview of decentralized trading of digital assets. https://collaborate.
            thebkp.com/project/TL/document/9/version/10/, 2018. Accessed 2018-12-27.
[PS00]      David Pointcheval and Jacques Stern. Security arguments for digital signatures and blind signatures. J.
            Cryptology, 13(3):361–396, 2000.
[PS18]      Chris Peikert and Sina Shiehian. Privately constraining and programming PRFs, the LWE way. In
            Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Practice and Theory in Public-Key Cryptography,
            PKC ’18, pages 675–701, 2018.
[rad]       Radar Relay. https://radarrelay.com/. Accessed 2018-12-27.
[Rei16]     Christian Reiwießner. From smart contracts to courts with not so smart judges. https://blog.
            ethereum.org/2016/02/17/smart-contracts-courts-not-smart-judges/, 2016.
[RH11]      Fergal Reid and Martin Harrigan. An analysis of anonymity in the Bitcoin system. In Proceedings of the
            3rd IEEE International Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT), and the 3rd IEEE
            International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), SocialCom/PASSAT ’11, pages 1318–1326,
            2011.
[RS13]      Dorit Ron and Adi Shamir. Quantitative analysis of the full Bitcoin transaction graph. In Proceedings of
            the 17th International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, FC ’13, pages 6–24,
            2013.
[Sah99]     Amit Sahai. Non-malleable non-interactive zero knowledge and adaptive chosen-ciphertext security. In
            Proceedings of the 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS ’99, pages
            543–553, 1999.
[SCF+ 15]   Felix Schuster, Manuel Costa, Cédric Fournet, Christos Gkantsidis, Marcus Peinado, Gloria Mainar-Ruiz,
            and Mark Russinovich. VC3: Trustworthy data analytics in the cloud using SGX. In Proceedings of the
            36th IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’15, pages 38–54, 2015.



                                                      61
[Sch91]     Claus-Peter Schnorr. Efficient signature generation by smart cards. Journal of Cryptology, 4(3):161–174,
            1991.
[SJ99]      Claus-Peter Schnorr and Markus Jakobsson. Security of discrete log cryptosystems in the random oracle
            and the generic model. In The Mathematics of Public-Key Cryptography, MPKC ’99, 1999.
[SMZ14]     Michele Spagnuolo, Federico Maggi, and Stefano Zanero. BitIodine: Extracting intelligence from the
            Bitcoin network. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Financial Cryptography and
            Data Security, FC ’14, pages 457–468, 2014.
[SS01]      Douglas R. Stinson Stinson and Reto Strobl. Provably secure distributed Schnorr signatures and a
            (t, n) threshold scheme for implicit certificates. In Proceedings of the 5th Australasian Conference on
            Information Security and Privacy, ACISP ’01, pages 417–434, 2001.
[TR17]      Jason Teutsch and Christian Reiwießner. A scalable verification solution for blockchains. https:
            //people.cs.uchicago.edu/~teutsch/papers/truebit.pdf, 2017.
[Val08]     Paul Valiant. Incrementally verifiable computation or proofs of knowledge imply time/space efficiency.
            In Proceedings of the 5th Theory of Cryptography Conference, TCC ’08, pages 1–18, 2008.
[VB15]      Fabian Vogelsteller and Vitalik Buterin. ERC-20 token standard, 2015. https://github.com/
            ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/EIPS/eip-20.md.
[Woo17]     Gavin Wood. Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger, 2017. http://
            yellowpaper.io.
[WSR+ 15]   Riad S. Wahby, Srinath T. V. Setty, Zuocheng Ren, Andrew J. Blumberg, and Michael Walfish. Efficient
            RAM and control flow in verifiable outsourced computation. In Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Network
            and Distributed System Security Symposium, NDSS ’15, 2015.
[ZCa15]     ZCash Company, 2015. https://z.cash/.
[ZCa16]     ZCash parameter generation. https://z.cash/technology/paramgen.html, 2016. Accessed:
            2017-09-28.
[ZDB+ 17]   Wenting Zheng, Ankur Dave, Jethro G. Beekman, Raluca Ada Popa, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
            Opaque: An oblivious and encrypted distributed analytics platform. In Proceedings of the 14th USENIX
            Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, NSDI ’17, pages 283–298, 2017.
[Zha18]     Wolfie Zhao. Bithumb $31 million crypto exchange hack: What we know (and don’t). https://
            www.coindesk.com/bithumb-exchanges-31-million-hack-know-dont-know, 2018. Accessed
            2018-12-27.




                                                      62
