What is Anoma?
Copy page
What is Anoma?
Anoma is the Distributed Operating System (DOS) which abstracts the complexities of existing blockchains away, providing one unified interface for users to interact with, and unified interface for developers to build on.
Why do we need the Anoma DOS?
The Anoma DOS is the missing piece to make the vision of a world computer a reality.
What does a world computer look like?
Blockchains like Bitcoin, Ethereum, Solana, Zcash, zkVMs, etc. are abstracted away and turned into resources for applications.
Developers have a unified development interface where they can access all the resources (features from the abstracted blockchains), as well as native intents, privacy, interoperability, and scaling among many other features provided by the Anoma Resource Machine (ARM). Advantages include:
Enabling developers to forget about blockchains and highly specialized tools and stacks, so that
they can focus on product and PMF instead
.
The app needs
to be built once, and it’ll work everywhere
(e.g. on Ethereum, Solana, etc.).
Developers only need to worry about building frontends
Users can interact with the entirety of crypto via one unified interface. Advantages include:
Users can forget about the underlying 5000 blockchains, and
focus on using their favorite applications
.
Defragmentation: remove the need for bridges and experiences such as:
Maker CDP example: If have to move a maker CDP from one chain to another chain you, have to liquidate your CDP, move the underlying asset manually (e.g. via bridges), and convert it back to the CDP
Monero example: If I want to use Monero’s privacy, I have to liquidate all my USDT, buy XMR, use Monero, then liquidate XMR and buy USDT again → Same model as bridges, bad UX and very expensive.
Dive deeper into the Anoma DOS and the World Computer:
“Ethereum isn’t a world computer… yet”
talk by Christopher Goes at Research Day 2024
What is Anoma’s Vision?
The Vision
of Anoma is to enable coordination infrastructure that scales to billions of people. To achieve this vision, the coordination mechanisms need to be
WWIII-resilient.
WWIII-resilience requires:
Intents
: the ability for individuals to turn their preferences into enforceable code
Privacy
: data and function privacy, as well as shared private state
Interoperability
: both between decentralized and centralized networks, remove the need for bridges
Scalability
: both local and global, without sacrificing decentralization
Anoma’s architecture is unique and is designed from the
ground up
to fulfil all these requirements.
Dive deeper:
“Sovereignists vs. Globalists”
talk by Adrian Brink a Devcon SEA 2024
Last updated on
January 13, 2026
The Anoma Resource Machine