Generic Calls
Copy page
Generic Calls
Generic calls are the Anoma Resource Machine’s mechanism for composing shielded state changes with arbitrary EVM execution. A transaction can unwrap value from the shielded pool, execute a pre-committed sequence of contract calls (a DEX trade, an approval, any on-chain interaction), and wrap the proceeds back into the pool, all atomically. If any step fails, the entire transaction reverts.
The mechanism has two halves that only make sense together:
the
Generic Call Resource
: an ARM resource that
commits
to what will be executed, and
the
Generic Call Forwarder
: an EVM contract that
executes
exactly that commitment.
Swaps
were the first application built on generic calls;
Earn
is the second.
The Generic Call Resource
A generic call is carried by an ephemeral resource inside an ARM action. Its resource commitments bind the execution completely:
Commitment
Binds
Label
The hash of the forwarder contract’s address,
where
the calls execute
Value
The hash of the ABI-encoded call array,
exactly what
executes: every target, amount, and byte of calldata
The resource logic proves these bindings and exposes the encoded calls as an external payload for the protocol adapter to execute. Because the resource sits in the signed action tree, the user’s authorization signature covers the full call sequence. Nothing about the execution (targets, order, calldata) can change after signing without invalidating the whole transaction.
The following establishes the Generic Call-specific naming conventions, not to be mistaken with the aforementioned ARM conventions.
Each call is a triple:
///
@notice
A struct containing data for a generic call to be executed as part of a forwarded call.
///
@param
to
The address to call.
///
@param
value
The native token value to be sent with the call.
///
@param
data
The bytes-encoded function selector and calldata for the call.
struct
Call
{
address
to;
uint256
value;
bytes
data;
}
The Generic Call Forwarder
Each supported chain has a
GenericCallForwarder
contract, pinned at deployment to its protocol adapter and to the generic-call resource logic:
function
forwardCall
(
bytes32
logicRef
,
bytes
calldata
input
)
external
nonReentrant
onlyProtocolAdapter
onlyLogicRef
(
logicRef
)
returns
(
bytes
memory
output
);
Only the protocol adapter
can invoke it, and only while executing a resource whose logic reference matches the one fixed in the forwarder’s constructor. There is no other path to
forwardCall
.
The input is decoded as a
Call[]
and executed
in order
. A call with calldata is a contract call; a call with only a value transfers native tokens; an empty call reverts. There are no restrictions on targets or function selectors. The authorization model is that the signed action tree, not the contract, decides what runs.
Nested
forwardCall
s are blocked by the reentrancy guard, but a single transaction may contain several sequential generic calls.
The protocol adapter verifies the returned bytes against an expected output committed in the transaction, so even the call results are covered by the commitment scheme.
Signature validation by commitment
The forwarder implements
ERC-1271
with a validation function that always returns the success magic value. Contracts like
Permit2
can pull tokens
from
the forwarder using a placeholder signature, because the real authorization already happened. The pull is part of a call sequence (or resource wrap) that the user signed into the action tree and that a validity proof covers. The EVM-level signature is never the security boundary; the action tree is.
Transient custody
The forwarder is a conduit, not a vault. Funds flow through it within a single atomic transaction, unwrapped in, traded, and pulled back out before the transaction ends. The contract itself documents the consequence:
Because any caller can forward and execute arbitrary calls through this contract, funds and other state held by it are only under a given user’s control transiently, during the atomic execution of the transaction. Any funds or state remaining after the action may be modified by subsequent callers.
In addition, the forwarder exposes a permissionless
sweep(token, to)
that transfers its
entire balance
of any token (or native currency) to any address, so residual balances should be treated as donated to the public.
A well-formed generic call must leave zero residual balance in the forwarder. Anything left behind after the transaction (over-delivered swap output, unused approvals’ underlying funds, stray transfers to the forwarder address) is claimable by anyone.
Deployments
Chain
Address
Ethereum
0x4220bcB4A9c755aeE676c675cCc8a113e2A48274
Arbitrum
0x24843B8F3F5eC2D557217148d6d4E2108497C404
Base
0x24843B8F3F5eC2D557217148d6d4E2108497C404
Optimism
0x24843B8F3F5eC2D557217148d6d4E2108497C404
BNB Smart Chain
0xee4b283fA62AE445DcfDf9a34a7569a8Bc6Ba7D5
The canonical, up-to-date list ships with the
anoma-generic-call-forwarder-bindings
release artifacts. Applications should always resolve the forwarder address from the backend’s network configuration rather than hard-coding it.
An example pattern
A generic-call application can have the following three-leg shape:
unwrap (shielded → forwarder) → execute Call[] → wrap (forwarder → shielded)
The amounts on both shielded legs are fixed in the signed action tree ahead of time, so the pattern fits interactions whose outcomes are known or guaranteed when the transaction is built.
Swaps
apply it with a firm RFQ quote. The guaranteed minimum buy amount is committed as the wrap amount, and the venue’s exact fill satisfies it precisely.
Earn
applies the same pattern to ERC-4626 vaults, where the outcome is
predictable
rather than fixed: a vault’s share price keeps moving while the transaction is proven. The wrap amount is therefore committed slightly below the quoted output, a worked example of the residual-balance property above.
Last updated on
January 13, 2026
The Anoma Protocol Adapter
Anoma Explorer