Protocol Mechanics
Yield Tokenization
PT
On this page
PT
Principal Token (PT) represents the principal portion of an underlying yield-bearing asset — essentially a zero-coupon bond on the underlying asset. Upon maturity, PT can be redeemed at 1:1 for the accounting asset, which appears in brackets at the end of each PT name. This is the base, principal asset deployed in the underlying protocol such as Lido, Renzo, and Aave (e.g. stETH in stETH, ETH in ezETH, USDC in aUSDC).
Since the collective value of its yield component has been separated, PT can be acquired at a discount relative to its accounting asset. Assuming no swaps, the value of PT will approach and ultimately match the value of accounting asset on maturity when redemption is enabled.
This appreciation in value is what establishes its Fixed Yield APY.
Key Properties
No Variable Yield or Points:
PT holders forgo all variable yield and points generated by the underlying asset — these are redirected entirely to YT holders.
Use as Collateral:
PTs are increasingly used as collateral in money markets (e.g., Morpho, Silo, Euler) due to their predictable value at maturity, which minimizes liquidation risk from market price volatility. See
PT as Collateral
for integration details.
Redemption Value
In general, yield bearing assets can be broadly categorized as:
Rebasing assets - tokens that increase in count/number overtime as yield is accrued
Examples: stETH, aUSDC
Interest-bearing assets - tokens that increase in value overtime as yield is accrued
Examples: ezETH, wstETH
In the case of reward-bearing assets, it’s particularly important to note that PT is redeemable 1:1 for the accounting asset,
NOT
the **underlying asset.
For example, the value of Renzo ezETH increases overtime relative to ETH as staking and restaking rewards are accrued. For every 1 PT-ezETH you own, you’ll be able to redeem 1 ETH worth of ezETH upon maturity,
NOT
1 ezETH which has a higher value**.**
You can refer to the asset in brackets in the market name to identify the accounting asset (e.g. PT-ezETH (ETH) means 1 PT redeems to 1 ETH worth of ezETH).
You can also double-check the redemption value of PT on
Pendle App
's individual asset pages.
How to Redeem PT
To redeem your PT on maturity:
Visit
Pendle Markets
and navigate to dashboard
Select the position you want to redeem.
Select an output asset. Pendle will automatically perform Redemption > Swap (if needed) for you
Previous
Minting
Next
YT